<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en"><head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><title>The King in Yellow | Project Gutenberg</title>
<link href="7816150453771233771_cover.jpg" rel="icon" type="image/x-cover" id="id-8735850628791331943"/>

<link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.9 by Project Gutenberg"/>
</head>
<body class="x-ebookmaker x-ebookmaker-3"><div class="c">*<span class="col2">*</span>
  <span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span></div>

<p>We had been speaking for some time in a dull monotonous strain before I
realized that we were discussing <i>The King in Yellow</i>. Oh the sin of
writing such words,—words which are clear as crystal, limpid and
musical as bubbling springs, words which sparkle and glow like the
poisoned diamonds of the Medicis! Oh the wickedness, the hopeless
damnation of a soul who could fascinate and paralyze human creatures
with such words,—words understood by the ignorant and wise alike, words
which are more precious than jewels, more soothing than music, more
awful than death!</p>

<p>We talked on, unmindful of the gathering shadows, and she was begging me
to throw away the clasp of black onyx quaintly inlaid with what we now
knew to be the Yellow Sign. I never shall know why I refused, though
even at this hour, here in my bedroom as I write this confession, I
should be glad to know <i>what</i> it was that prevented me from tearing the
Yellow Sign from my breast and casting it into the fire. I am sure I
wished to do so, and yet Tessie pleaded with me in vain. Night fell and
the hours dragged on, but still we murmured to each other of the King
and the Pallid Mask, and midnight sounded from the misty spires in the
fog-wrapped city. We spoke of Hastur and of Cassilda, while outside the
fog rolled against the blank window-panes as the cloud waves roll and
break on the shores of Hali.</p>

<p>The house was very silent now, and not a sound came up from the misty
streets. Tessie lay among the cushions, her face a grey blot in the
gloom, but her hands were clasped in mine, and I knew that she knew and
read my thoughts as I read hers, for we had understood the mystery of
the Hyades and the Phantom of Truth was laid. Then as we answered each
other, swiftly, silently, thought on thought, the shadows stirred in the
gloom about us, and far in the distant streets we heard a sound. Nearer
and nearer it came, the dull crunching of wheels, nearer and yet nearer,
and now, outside before the door it ceased, and I dragged myself to the
window and saw a black-plumed hearse. The gate below opened and shut,
and I crept shaking to my door and bolted it, but I knew no bolts, no
locks, could keep that creature out who was coming for the Yellow Sign.
And now I heard him moving very softly along the hall. Now he was at the
door, and the bolts rotted at his touch. Now he had entered. With eyes
starting from my head I peered into the darkness, but when he came into
the room I did not see him. It was only when I felt him envelope me in
his cold soft grasp that I cried out and struggled with deadly fury, but
my hands were useless and he tore the onyx clasp from my coat and struck
me full in the face. Then, as I fell, I heard Tessie’s soft cry and her
spirit fled: and even while falling I longed to follow her, for I knew
that the King in Yellow had opened his tattered mantle and there was
only God to cry to now.</p>

<p>I could tell more, but I cannot see what help it will be to the world.
As for me, I am past human help or hope. As I lie here, writing,
careless even whether or not I die before I finish, I can see the doctor
gathering up his powders and phials with a vague gesture to the good
priest beside me, which I understand.</p>

<p>They will be very curious to know the tragedy—they of the outside world
who write books and print millions of newspapers, but I shall write no
more, and the father confessor will seal my last words with the seal of
sanctity when his holy office is done. They of the outside world may
send their creatures into wrecked homes and death-smitten firesides, and
their newspapers will batten on blood and tears, but with me their spies
must halt before the confessional. They know that Tessie is dead and
that I am dying. They know how the people in the house, aroused by an
infernal scream, rushed into my room and found one living and two dead,
but they do not know what I shall tell them now; they do not know that
the doctor said as he pointed to a horrible decomposed heap on the
floor—the livid corpse of the watchman from the church: “I have no
theory, no explanation. That man must have been dead for months!”</p>

<div class="c">*<span class="col2">*</span>
  <span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span></div>

<p>I think I am dying. I wish the priest would—</p>

<h2 id="pgepubid00015"><a id="THE_DEMOISELLE_DYS"/>THE DEMOISELLE D’YS</h2>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Mais je croy que je</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">Suis descendu on puiz</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">Ténébreux onquel disoit</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">Heraclytus estre Vereté cachée.”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<div class="blockquot">
<p>“There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I
know not:</p>

<p>“The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the
way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a
maid.”</p>
</div>

<h3 id="pgepubid00016">I</h3>

<p>The utter desolation of the scene began to have its effect; I sat down
to face the situation and, if possible, recall to mind some landmark
which might aid me in extricating myself from my present position. If I
could only find the ocean again all would be clear, for I knew one could
see the island of Groix from the cliffs.</p>

<p>I laid down my gun, and kneeling behind a rock lighted a pipe. Then I
looked at my watch. It was nearly four o’clock. I might have wandered
far from Kerselec since daybreak.</p>

<p>Standing the day before on the cliffs below Kerselec with Goulven,
looking out over the sombre moors among which I had now lost my way,
these downs had appeared to me level as a meadow, stretching to the
horizon, and although I knew how deceptive is distance, I could not
realize that what from Kerselec seemed to be mere grassy hollows were
great valleys covered with gorse and heather, and what looked like
scattered boulders were in reality enormous cliffs of granite.</p>

<p>“It’s a bad place for a stranger,” old Goulven had said: “you’d better
take a guide;” and I had replied, “I shall not lose myself.” Now I knew
that I had lost myself, as I sat there smoking, with the sea-wind
blowing in my face. On every side stretched the moorland, covered with
flowering gorse and heath and granite boulders. There was not a tree in
sight, much less a house. After a while, I picked up the gun, and
turning my back on the sun tramped on again.</p>

<p>There was little use in following any of the brawling streams which
every now and then crossed my path, for, instead of flowing into the
sea, they ran inland to reedy pools in the hollows of the moors. I had
followed several, but they all led me to swamps or silent little ponds
from which the snipe rose peeping and wheeled away in an ecstasy of
fright. I began to feel fatigued, and the gun galled my shoulder in spite
of the double pads. The sun sank lower and lower, shining level across
yellow gorse and the moorland pools.</p>

<p>As I walked my own gigantic shadow led me on, seeming to lengthen at
every step. The gorse scraped against my leggings, crackled beneath my
feet, showering the brown earth with blossoms, and the brake bowed and
billowed along my path. From tufts of heath rabbits scurried away
through the bracken, and among the swamp grass I heard the wild duck’s
drowsy quack. Once a fox stole across my path, and again, as I stooped
to drink at a hurrying rill, a heron flapped heavily from the reeds
beside me. I turned to look at the sun. It seemed to touch the edges of
the plain. When at last I decided that it was useless to go on, and that
I must make up my mind to spend at least one night on the moors, I threw
myself down thoroughly fagged out. The evening sunlight slanted warm
across my body, but the sea-winds began to rise, and I felt a chill
strike through me from my wet shooting-boots. High overhead gulls were
wheeling and tossing like bits of white paper; from some distant marsh a
solitary curlew called. Little by little the sun sank into the plain,
and the zenith flushed with the after-glow. I watched the sky change
from palest gold to pink and then to smouldering fire. Clouds of midges
danced above me, and high in the calm air a bat dipped and soared. My
eyelids began to droop. Then as I shook off the drowsiness a sudden
crash among the bracken roused me. I raised my eyes. A great bird hung
quivering in the air above my face. For an instant I stared, incapable
of motion; then something leaped past me in the ferns and the bird rose,
wheeled, and pitched headlong into the brake.</p>

<p>I was on my feet in an instant peering through the gorse. There came the
sound of a struggle from a bunch of heather close by, and then all was
quiet. I stepped forward, my gun poised, but when I came to the heather
the gun fell under my arm again, and I stood motionless in silent
astonishment. A dead hare lay on the ground, and on the hare stood a
magnificent falcon, one talon buried in the creature’s neck, the other
planted firmly on its limp flank. But what astonished me, was not the
mere sight of a falcon sitting upon its prey. I had seen that more than
once. It was that the falcon was fitted with a sort of leash about both
talons, and from the leash hung a round bit of metal like a sleigh-bell.
The bird turned its fierce yellow eyes on me, and then stooped and
struck its curved beak into the quarry. At the same instant hurried
steps sounded among the heather, and a girl sprang into the covert in
front. Without a glance at me she walked up to the falcon, and passing
her gloved hand under its breast, raised it from the quarry. Then she
deftly slipped a small hood over the bird’s head, and holding it out on
her gauntlet, stooped and picked up the hare.</p>

<p>She passed a cord about the animal’s legs and fastened the end of the
thong to her girdle. Then she started to retrace her steps through the
covert. As she passed me I raised my cap and she acknowledged my presence
with a scarcely perceptible inclination. I had been so astonished, so
lost in admiration of the scene before my eyes, that it had not occurred
to me that here was my salvation. But as she moved away I recollected
that unless I wanted to sleep on a windy moor that night I had better
recover my speech without delay. At my first word she hesitated, and as
I stepped before her I thought a look of fear came into her beautiful
eyes. But as I humbly explained my unpleasant plight, her face flushed
and she looked at me in wonder.</p>

<p>“Surely you did not come from Kerselec!” she repeated.</p>

<p>Her sweet voice had no trace of the Breton accent nor of any accent
which I knew, and yet there was something in it I seemed to have heard
before, something quaint and indefinable, like the theme of an old song.</p>

<p>I explained that I was an American, unacquainted with Finistère,
shooting there for my own amusement.</p>

<p>“An American,” she repeated in the same quaint musical tones. “I have
never before seen an American.”</p>

<p>For a moment she stood silent, then looking at me she said. “If you
should walk all night you could not reach Kerselec now, even if you had
a guide.”</p>

<p>This was pleasant news.</p>

<p>“But,” I began, “if I could only find a peasant’s hut where I might get
something to eat, and shelter.”</p>

<p>The falcon on her wrist fluttered and shook its head. The girl smoothed
its glossy back and glanced at me.</p>

<p>“Look around,” she said gently. “Can you see the end of these moors?
Look, north, south, east, west. Can you see anything but moorland and
bracken?”</p>

<p>“No,” I said.</p>

<p>“The moor is wild and desolate. It is easy to enter, but sometimes they
who enter never leave it. There are no peasants’ huts here.”</p>

<p>“Well,” I said, “if you will tell me in which direction Kerselec lies,
to-morrow it will take me no longer to go back than it has to come.”</p>

<p>She looked at me again with an expression almost like pity.</p>

<p>“Ah,” she said, “to come is easy and takes hours; to go is
different—and may take centuries.”</p>

<p>I stared at her in amazement but decided that I had misunderstood her.
Then before I had time to speak she drew a whistle from her belt and
sounded it.</p>

<p>“Sit down and rest,” she said to me; “you have come a long distance and
are tired.”</p>

<p>She gathered up her pleated skirts and motioning me to follow picked her
dainty way through the gorse to a flat rock among the ferns.</p>

<p>“They will be here directly,” she said, and taking a seat at one end of
the rock invited me to sit down on the other edge. The after-glow was
beginning to fade in the sky and a single star twinkled faintly through
the rosy haze. A long wavering triangle of water-fowl drifted southward
over our heads, and from the swamps around plover were calling.</p>

<p>“They are very beautiful—these moors,” she said quietly.</p>

<p>“Beautiful, but cruel to strangers,” I answered.</p>

<p>“Beautiful and cruel,” she repeated dreamily, “beautiful and cruel.”</p>

<p>“Like a woman,” I said stupidly.</p>

<p>“Oh,” she cried with a little catch in her breath, and looked at me. Her
dark eyes met mine, and I thought she seemed angry or frightened.</p>

<p>“Like a woman,” she repeated under her breath, “How cruel to say so!”
Then after a pause, as though speaking aloud to herself, “How cruel for
him to say that!”</p>

<p>I don’t know what sort of an apology I offered for my inane, though
harmless speech, but I know that she seemed so troubled about it that I
began to think I had said something very dreadful without knowing it,
and remembered with horror the pitfalls and snares which the French
language sets for foreigners. While I was trying to imagine what I might
have said, a sound of voices came across the moor, and the girl rose to
her feet.</p>

<p>“No,” she said, with a trace of a smile on her pale face, “I will not
accept your apologies, monsieur, but I must prove you wrong, and that
shall be my revenge. Look. Here come Hastur and Raoul.”</p>

<p>Two men loomed up in the twilight. One had a sack across his shoulders
and the other carried a hoop before him as a waiter carries a tray. The
hoop was fastened with straps to his shoulders, and around the edge of
the circlet sat three hooded falcons fitted with tinkling bells. The
girl stepped up to the falconer, and with a quick turn of her wrist
transferred her falcon to the hoop, where it quickly sidled off and
nestled among its mates, who shook their hooded heads and ruffled their
feathers till the belled jesses tinkled again. The other man stepped
forward and bowing respectfully took up the hare and dropped it into the
game-sack.</p>

<p>“These are my piqueurs,” said the girl, turning to me with a gentle
dignity. “Raoul is a good fauconnier, and I shall some day make him
grand veneur. Hastur is incomparable.”</p>

<p>The two silent men saluted me respectfully.</p>

<p>“Did I not tell you, monsieur, that I should prove you wrong?” she
continued. “This, then, is my revenge, that you do me the courtesy of
accepting food and shelter at my own house.”</p>

<p>Before I could answer she spoke to the falconers, who started instantly
across the heath, and with a gracious gesture to me she followed. I
don’t know whether I made her understand how profoundly grateful I felt,
but she seemed pleased to listen, as we walked over the dewy heather.</p>

<p>“Are you not very tired?” she asked.</p>

<p>I had clean forgotten my fatigue in her presence, and I told her so.</p>

<p>“Don’t you think your gallantry is a little old-fashioned?” she said;
and when I looked confused and humbled, she added quietly, “Oh, I like
it, I like everything old-fashioned, and it is delightful to hear you
say such pretty things.”</p>

<p>The moorland around us was very still now under its ghostly sheet of
mist. The plovers had ceased their calling; the crickets and all the
little creatures of the fields were silent as we passed, yet it seemed
to me as if I could hear them beginning again far behind us. Well in
advance, the two tall falconers strode across the heather, and the faint
jingling of the hawks’ bells came to our ears in distant murmuring
chimes.</p>

<p>Suddenly a splendid hound dashed out of the mist in front, followed by
another and another until half-a-dozen or more were bounding and leaping
around the girl beside me. She caressed and quieted them with her gloved
hand, speaking to them in quaint terms which I remembered to have seen
in old French manuscripts.</p>

<p>Then the falcons on the circlet borne by the falconer ahead began to
beat their wings and scream, and from somewhere out of sight the notes
of a hunting-horn floated across the moor. The hounds sprang away before
us and vanished in the twilight, the falcons flapped and squealed upon
their perch, and the girl, taking up the song of the horn, began to hum.
Clear and mellow her voice sounded in the night air.</p>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Chasseur, chasseur, chassez encore,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Quittez Rosette et Jeanneton,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Tonton, tonton, tontaine, tonton,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Ou, pour, rabattre, dès l’aurore,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Que les Amours soient de planton,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Tonton, tontaine, tonton.”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>As I listened to her lovely voice a grey mass which rapidly grew more
distinct loomed up in front, and the horn rang out joyously through the
tumult of the hounds and falcons. A torch glimmered at a gate, a light
streamed through an opening door, and we stepped upon a wooden bridge
which trembled under our feet and rose creaking and straining behind us
as we passed over the moat and into a small stone court, walled on every
side. From an open doorway a man came and, bending in salutation,
presented a cup to the girl beside me. She took the cup and touched it
with her lips, then lowering it turned to me and said in a low voice, “I
bid you welcome.”</p>

<p>At that moment one of the falconers came with another cup, but before
handing it to me, presented it to the girl, who tasted it. The falconer
made a gesture to receive it, but she hesitated a moment, and then,
stepping forward, offered me the cup with her own hands. I felt this to
be an act of extraordinary graciousness, but hardly knew what was
expected of me, and did not raise it to my lips at once. The girl
flushed crimson. I saw that I must act quickly.</p>

<p>“Mademoiselle,” I faltered, “a stranger whom you have saved from dangers
he may never realize empties this cup to the gentlest and loveliest
hostess of France.”</p>

<p>“In His name,” she murmured, crossing herself as I drained the cup. Then
stepping into the doorway she turned to me with a pretty gesture and,
taking my hand in hers, led me into the house, saying again and again:
“You are very welcome, indeed you are welcome to the Château d’Ys.”</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00017">II</h3>

<p>I awoke next morning with the music of the horn in my ears, and leaping
out of the ancient bed, went to a curtained window where the sunlight
filtered through little deep-set panes. The horn ceased as I looked into
the court below.</p>

<p>A man who might have been brother to the two falconers of the night
before stood in the midst of a pack of hounds. A curved horn was
strapped over his back, and in his hand he held a long-lashed whip. The
dogs whined and yelped, dancing around him in anticipation; there was
the stamp of horses, too, in the walled yard.</p>

<p>“Mount!” cried a voice in Breton, and with a clatter of hoofs the two
falconers, with falcons upon their wrists, rode into the courtyard among
the hounds. Then I heard another voice which sent the blood throbbing
through my heart: “Piriou Louis, hunt the hounds well and spare neither
spur nor whip. Thou Raoul and thou Gaston, see that the <i>epervier</i> does
not prove himself <i>niais</i>, and if it be best in your judgment, <i>faites
courtoisie à l’oiseau. Jardiner un oiseau</i>, like the <i>mué</i> there on
Hastur’s wrist, is not difficult, but thou, Raoul, mayest not find it so
simple to govern that <i>hagard</i>. Twice last week he foamed <i>au vif</i> and
lost the <i>beccade</i> although he is used to the <i>leurre</i>. The bird acts
like a stupid <i>branchier</i>. <i>Paître un hagard n’est pas si facile.</i>”</p>

<p>Was I dreaming? The old language of falconry which I had read in yellow
manuscripts—the old forgotten French of the middle ages was sounding in
my ears while the hounds bayed and the hawks’ bells tinkled
accompaniment to the stamping horses. She spoke again in the sweet
forgotten language:</p>

<p>“If you would rather attach the <i>longe</i> and leave thy <i>hagard au bloc</i>,
Raoul, I shall say nothing; for it were a pity to spoil so fair a day’s
sport with an ill-trained <i>sors</i>. <i>Essimer abaisser</i>,—it is possibly
the best way. <i>Ça lui donnera des reins.</i> I was perhaps hasty with the
bird. It takes time to pass <i>à la filière</i> and the exercises <i>d’escap</i>.”</p>

<p>Then the falconer Raoul bowed in his stirrups and replied: “If it be the
pleasure of Mademoiselle, I shall keep the hawk.”</p>

<p>“It is my wish,” she answered. “Falconry I know, but you have yet to
give me many a lesson in <i>Autourserie</i>, my poor Raoul. Sieur Piriou
Louis mount!”</p>

<p>The huntsman sprang into an archway and in an instant returned, mounted
upon a strong black horse, followed by a piqueur also mounted.</p>

<p>“Ah!” she cried joyously, “speed Glemarec René! speed! speed all! Sound
thy horn, Sieur Piriou!”</p>

<p>The silvery music of the hunting-horn filled the courtyard, the hounds
sprang through the gateway and galloping hoof-beats plunged out of the
paved court; loud on the drawbridge, suddenly muffled, then lost in the
heather and bracken of the moors. Distant and more distant sounded the
horn, until it became so faint that the sudden carol of a soaring lark
drowned it in my ears. I heard the voice below responding to some call
from within the house.</p>

<p>“I do not regret the chase, I will go another time. Courtesy to the
stranger, Pelagie, remember!”</p>

<p>And a feeble voice came quavering from within the house, “<i>Courtoisie</i>.”</p>

<p>I stripped, and rubbed myself from head to foot in the huge earthen
basin of icy water which stood upon the stone floor at the foot of my
bed. Then I looked about for my clothes. They were gone, but on a settle
near the door lay a heap of garments which I inspected with
astonishment. As my clothes had vanished, I was compelled to attire
myself in the costume which had evidently been placed there for me to
wear while my own clothes dried. Everything was there, cap, shoes, and
hunting doublet of silvery grey homespun; but the close-fitting costume
and seamless shoes belonged to another century, and I remembered the
strange costumes of the three falconers in the courtyard. I was sure
that it was not the modern dress of any portion of France or Brittany;
but not until I was dressed and stood before a mirror between the
windows did I realize that I was clothed much more like a young huntsman
of the middle ages than like a Breton of that day. I hesitated and
picked up the cap. Should I go down and present myself in that strange
guise? There seemed to be no help for it, my own clothes were gone and
there was no bell in the ancient chamber to call a servant; so I
contented myself with removing a short hawk’s feather from the cap, and,
opening the door, went downstairs.</p>

<p>By the fireplace in the large room at the foot of the stairs an old
Breton woman sat spinning with a distaff. She looked up at me when I
appeared, and, smiling frankly, wished me health in the Breton language,
to which I laughingly replied in French. At the same moment my hostess
appeared and returned my salutation with a grace and dignity that sent a
thrill to my heart. Her lovely head with its dark curly hair was crowned
with a head-dress which set all doubts as to the epoch of my own costume
at rest. Her slender figure was exquisitely set off in the homespun
hunting-gown edged with silver, and on her gauntlet-covered wrist she
bore one of her petted hawks. With perfect simplicity she took my hand
and led me into the garden in the court, and seating herself before a
table invited me very sweetly to sit beside her. Then she asked me in
her soft quaint accent how I had passed the night, and whether I was
very much inconvenienced by wearing the clothes which old Pelagie had
put there for me while I slept. I looked at my own clothes and shoes,
drying in the sun by the garden-wall, and hated them. What horrors they
were compared with the graceful costume which I now wore! I told her
this laughing, but she agreed with me very seriously.</p>

<p>“We will throw them away,” she said in a quiet voice. In my astonishment
I attempted to explain that I not only could not think of accepting
clothes from anybody, although for all I knew it might be the custom of
hospitality in that part of the country, but that I should cut an
impossible figure if I returned to France clothed as I was then.</p>

<p>She laughed and tossed her pretty head, saying something in old French
which I did not understand, and then Pelagie trotted out with a tray on
which stood two bowls of milk, a loaf of white bread, fruit, a platter
of honey-comb, and a flagon of deep red wine. “You see I have not yet
broken my fast because I wished you to eat with me. But I am very
hungry,” she smiled.</p>

<p>“I would rather die than forget one word of what you have said!” I
blurted out, while my cheeks burned. “She will think me mad,” I added to
myself, but she turned to me with sparkling eyes.</p>

<p>“Ah!” she murmured. “Then Monsieur knows all that there is of
chivalry—”</p>

<p>She crossed herself and broke bread. I sat and watched her white hands,
not daring to raise my eyes to hers.</p>

<p>“Will you not eat?” she asked. “Why do you look so troubled?”</p>

<p>Ah, why? I knew it now. I knew I would give my life to touch with my
lips those rosy palms—I understood now that from the moment when I
looked into her dark eyes there on the moor last night I had loved her.
My great and sudden passion held me speechless.</p>

<p>“Are you ill at ease?” she asked again.</p>

<p>Then, like a man who pronounces his own doom, I answered in a low voice:
“Yes, I am ill at ease for love of you.” And as she did not stir nor
answer, the same power moved my lips in spite of me and I said, “I, who
am unworthy of the lightest of your thoughts, I who abuse hospitality
and repay your gentle courtesy with bold presumption, I love you.”</p>

<p>She leaned her head upon her hands, and answered softly, “I love you.
Your words are very dear to me. I love you.”</p>

<p>“Then I shall win you.”</p>

<p>“Win me,” she replied.</p>

<p>But all the time I had been sitting silent, my face turned toward her.
She, also silent, her sweet face resting on her upturned palm, sat
facing me, and as her eyes looked into mine I knew that neither she nor
I had spoken human speech; but I knew that her soul had answered mine,
and I drew myself up feeling youth and joyous love coursing through
every vein. She, with a bright colour in her lovely face, seemed as one
awakened from a dream, and her eyes sought mine with a questioning
glance which made me tremble with delight. We broke our fast, speaking
of ourselves. I told her my name and she told me hers, the Demoiselle
Jeanne d’Ys.</p>

<p>She spoke of her father and mother’s death, and how the nineteen of her
years had been passed in the little fortified farm alone with her nurse
Pelagie, Glemarec René the piqueur, and the four falconers, Raoul,
Gaston, Hastur, and the Sieur Piriou Louis, who had served her father.
She had never been outside the moorland—never even had seen a human
soul before, except the falconers and Pelagie. She did not know how she
had heard of Kerselec; perhaps the falconers had spoken of it. She knew
the legends of Loup Garou and Jeanne la Flamme from her nurse Pelagie.
She embroidered and spun flax. Her hawks and hounds were her only
distraction. When she had met me there on the moor she had been so
frightened that she almost dropped at the sound of my voice. She had, it
was true, seen ships at sea from the cliffs, but as far as the eye could
reach the moors over which she galloped were destitute of any sign of
human life. There was a legend which old Pelagie told, how anybody once
lost in the unexplored moorland might never return, because the moors
were enchanted. She did not know whether it was true, she never had
thought about it until she met me. She did not know whether the
falconers had even been outside, or whether they could go if they would.
The books in the house which Pelagie, the nurse, had taught her to read
were hundreds of years old.</p>

<p>All this she told me with a sweet seriousness seldom seen in any one but
children. My own name she found easy to pronounce, and insisted, because
my first name was Philip, I must have French blood in me. She did not
seem curious to learn anything about the outside world, and I thought
perhaps she considered it had forfeited her interest and respect from
the stories of her nurse.</p>

<p>We were still sitting at the table, and she was throwing grapes to the
small field birds which came fearlessly to our very feet.</p>

<p>I began to speak in a vague way of going, but she would not hear of it,
and before I knew it I had promised to stay a week and hunt with hawk
and hound in their company. I also obtained permission to come again
from Kerselec and visit her after my return.</p>

<p>“Why,” she said innocently, “I do not know what I should do if you never
came back;” and I, knowing that I had no right to awaken her with the
sudden shock which the avowal of my own love would bring to her, sat
silent, hardly daring to breathe.</p>

<p>“You will come very often?” she asked.</p>

<p>“Very often,” I said.</p>

<p>“Every day?”</p>

<p>“Every day.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” she sighed, “I am very happy. Come and see my hawks.”</p>

<p>She rose and took my hand again with a childlike innocence of
possession, and we walked through the garden and fruit trees to a grassy
lawn which was bordered by a brook. Over the lawn were scattered fifteen
or twenty stumps of trees—partially imbedded in the grass—and upon all
of these except two sat falcons. They were attached to the stumps by
thongs which were in turn fastened with steel rivets to their legs just
above the talons. A little stream of pure spring water flowed in a
winding course within easy distance of each perch.</p>

<p>The birds set up a clamour when the girl appeared, but she went from one
to another, caressing some, taking others for an instant upon her wrist,
or stooping to adjust their jesses.</p>

<p>“Are they not pretty?” she said. “See, here is a falcon-gentil. We call
it ‘ignoble,’ because it takes the quarry in direct chase. This is a
blue falcon. In falconry we call it ‘noble’ because it rises over the
quarry, and wheeling, drops upon it from above. This white bird is a
gerfalcon from the north. It is also ‘noble!’ Here is a merlin, and this
tiercelet is a falcon-heroner.”</p>

<p>I asked her how she had learned the old language of falconry. She did
not remember, but thought her father must have taught it to her when she
was very young.</p>

<p>Then she led me away and showed me the young falcons still in the nest.
“They are termed <i>niais</i> in falconry,” she explained. “A <i>branchier</i> is
the young bird which is just able to leave the nest and hop from branch
to branch. A young bird which has not yet moulted is called a <i>sors</i>,
and a <i>mué</i> is a hawk which has moulted in captivity. When we catch a
wild falcon which has changed its plumage we term it a <i>hagard</i>. Raoul
first taught me to dress a falcon. Shall I teach you how it is done?”</p>

<p>She seated herself on the bank of the stream among the falcons and I
threw myself at her feet to listen.</p>

<p>Then the Demoiselle d’Ys held up one rosy-tipped finger and began very
gravely.</p>

<p>“First one must catch the falcon.”</p>

<p>“I am caught,” I answered.</p>

<p>She laughed very prettily and told me my <i>dressage</i> would perhaps be
difficult, as I was noble.</p>

<p>“I am already tamed,” I replied; “jessed and belled.”</p>

<p>She laughed, delighted. “Oh, my brave falcon; then you will return at my
call?”</p>

<p>“I am yours,” I answered gravely.</p>

<p>She sat silent for a moment. Then the colour heightened in her cheeks
and she held up her finger again, saying, “Listen; I wish to speak of
falconry—”</p>

<p>“I listen, Countess Jeanne d’Ys.”</p>

<p>But again she fell into the reverie, and her eyes seemed fixed on
something beyond the summer clouds.</p>

<p>“Philip,” she said at last.</p>

<p>“Jeanne,” I whispered.</p>

<p>“That is all,—that is what I wished,” she sighed,—“Philip and Jeanne.”</p>

<p>She held her hand toward me and I touched it with my lips.</p>

<p>“Win me,” she said, but this time it was the body and soul which spoke
in unison.</p>

<p>After a while she began again: “Let us speak of falconry.”</p>

<p>“Begin,” I replied; “we have caught the falcon.”</p>

<p>Then Jeanne d’Ys took my hand in both of hers and told me how with
infinite patience the young falcon was taught to perch upon the wrist,
how little by little it became used to the belled jesses and the
<i>chaperon à cornette</i>.</p>

<p>“They must first have a good appetite,” she said; “then little by little
I reduce their nourishment; which in falconry we call <i>pât</i>. When, after
many nights passed <i>au bloc</i> as these birds are now, I prevail upon the
<i>hagard</i> to stay quietly on the wrist, then the bird is ready to be
taught to come for its food. I fix the <i>pât</i> to the end of a thong, or
<i>leurre</i>, and teach the bird to come to me as soon as I begin to whirl
the cord in circles about my head. At first I drop the <i>pât</i> when the
falcon comes, and he eats the food on the ground. After a little he will
learn to seize the <i>leurre</i> in motion as I whirl it around my head or
drag it over the ground. After this it is easy to teach the falcon to
strike at game, always remembering to <i>‘faire courtoisie á l’oiseau’</i>,
that is, to allow the bird to taste the quarry.”</p>

<p>A squeal from one of the falcons interrupted her, and she arose to
adjust the <i>longe</i> which had become whipped about the <i>bloc</i>, but the
bird still flapped its wings and screamed.</p>

<p>“What <i>is</i> the matter?” she said. “Philip, can you see?”</p>

<p>I looked around and at first saw nothing to cause the commotion, which
was now heightened by the screams and flapping of all the birds. Then my
eye fell upon the flat rock beside the stream from which the girl had
risen. A grey serpent was moving slowly across the surface of the
boulder, and the eyes in its flat triangular head sparkled like jet.</p>

<p>“A couleuvre,” she said quietly.</p>

<p>“It is harmless, is it not?” I asked.</p>

<p>She pointed to the black V-shaped figure on the neck.</p>

<p>“It is certain death,” she said; “it is a viper.”</p>

<p>We watched the reptile moving slowly over the smooth rock to where the
sunlight fell in a broad warm patch.</p>

<p>I started forward to examine it, but she clung to my arm crying, “Don’t,
Philip, I am afraid.”</p>

<p>“For me?”</p>

<p>“For you, Philip,—I love you.”</p>

<p>Then I took her in my arms and kissed her on the lips, but all I could
say was: “Jeanne, Jeanne, Jeanne.” And as she lay trembling on my
breast, something struck my foot in the grass below, but I did not heed
it. Then again something struck my ankle, and a sharp pain shot through
me. I looked into the sweet face of Jeanne d’Ys and kissed her, and with
all my strength lifted her in my arms and flung her from me. Then
bending, I tore the viper from my ankle and set my heel upon its head. I
remember feeling weak and numb,—I remember falling to the ground.
Through my slowly glazing eyes I saw Jeanne’s white face bending close
to mine, and when the light in my eyes went out I still felt her arms
about my neck, and her soft cheek against my drawn lips.</p>

<div class="c">*<span class="col2">*</span>
  <span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span></div>

<p>When I opened my eyes, I looked around in terror. Jeanne was gone. I saw
the stream and the flat rock; I saw the crushed viper in the grass
beside me, but the hawks and <i>blocs</i> had disappeared. I sprang to my
feet. The garden, the fruit trees, the drawbridge and the walled court
were gone. I stared stupidly at a heap of crumbling ruins, ivy-covered
and grey, through which great trees had pushed their way. I crept
forward, dragging my numbed foot, and as I moved, a falcon sailed from
the tree-tops among the ruins, and soaring, mounting in narrowing
circles, faded and vanished in the clouds above.</p>

<p>“Jeanne, Jeanne,” I cried, but my voice died on my lips, and I fell on
my knees among the weeds. And as God willed it, I, not knowing, had
fallen kneeling before a crumbling shrine carved in stone for our Mother
of Sorrows. I saw the sad face of the Virgin wrought in the cold stone.
I saw the cross and thorns at her feet, and beneath it I read:</p>

<p class="c" style="margin-top: 2%; margin-bottom: 2%;">“P<small>RAY FOR THE SOUL OF THE</small><br/>
D<small>EMOISELLE</small> J<small>EANNE D</small>’Ys,<br/>
          <small>WHO DIED<br/>
IN HER YOUTH FOR LOVE OF</small><br/>
   P<small>HILIP, A</small> S<small>TRANGER</small>.<br/>
          A.D. 1573.”</p>

<p>But upon the icy slab lay a woman’s glove still warm and fragrant.</p>

<h2 id="pgepubid00018"><a id="THE_PROPHETS_PARADISE"/>THE PROPHETS’ PARADISE</h2>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“If but the Vine and Love Abjuring Band</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Are in the Prophets’ Paradise to stand,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Alack, I doubt the Prophets’ Paradise,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Were empty as the hollow of one’s hand.”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<h3 id="pgepubid00019">THE STUDIO</h3>

<p>He smiled, saying, “Seek her throughout the world.”</p>

<p>I said, “Why tell me of the world? My world is here, between these walls
and the sheet of glass above; here among gilded flagons and dull
jewelled arms, tarnished frames and canvasses, black chests and
high-backed chairs, quaintly carved and stained in blue and gold.”</p>

<p>“For whom do you wait?” he said, and I answered, “When she comes I shall
know her.”</p>

<p>On my hearth a tongue of flame whispered secrets to the whitening ashes.
In the street below I heard footsteps, a voice, and a song.</p>

<p>“For whom then do you wait?” he said, and I answered, “I shall know
her.”</p>

<p>Footsteps, a voice, and a song in the street below, and I knew the song
but neither the steps nor the voice.</p>

<p>“Fool!” he cried, “the song is the same, the voice and steps have but
changed with years!”</p>

<p>On the hearth a tongue of flame whispered above the whitening ashes:
“Wait no more; they have passed, the steps and the voice in the street
below.”</p>

<p>Then he smiled, saying, “For whom do you wait? Seek her throughout the
world!”</p>

<p>I answered, “My world is here, between these walls and the sheet of
glass above; here among gilded flagons and dull jewelled arms, tarnished
frames and canvasses, black chests and high-backed chairs, quaintly
carved and stained in blue and gold.”</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00020">THE PHANTOM</h3>

<p>The Phantom of the Past would go no further.</p>

<p>“If it is true,” she sighed, “that you find in me a friend, let us turn
back together. You will forget, here, under the summer sky.”</p>

<p>I held her close, pleading, caressing; I seized her, white with anger,
but she resisted.</p>

<p>“If it is true,” she sighed, “that you find in me a friend, let us turn
back together.”</p>

<p>The Phantom of the Past would go no further.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00021">THE SACRIFICE</h3>

<p>I went into a field of flowers, whose petals are whiter than snow and
whose hearts are pure gold.</p>

<p>Far afield a woman cried, “I have killed him I loved!” and from a jar
she poured blood upon the flowers whose petals are whiter than snow and
whose hearts are pure gold.</p>

<p>Far afield I followed, and on the jar I read a thousand names, while
from within the fresh blood bubbled to the brim.</p>

<p>“I have killed him I loved!” she cried. “The world’s athirst; now let it
drink!” She passed, and far afield I watched her pouring blood upon the
flowers whose petals are whiter than snow and whose hearts are pure
gold.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00022">DESTINY</h3>

<p>I came to the bridge which few may pass.</p>

<p>“Pass!” cried the keeper, but I laughed, saying, “There is time;” and he
smiled and shut the gates.</p>

<p>To the bridge which few may pass came young and old. All were refused.
Idly I stood and counted them, until, wearied of their noise and
lamentations, I came again to the bridge which few may pass.</p>

<p>Those in the throng about the gates shrieked out, “He comes too late!”
But I laughed, saying, “There is time.”</p>

<p>“Pass!” cried the keeper as I entered; then smiled and shut the gates.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00023">THE THRONG</h3>

<p>There, where the throng was thickest in the street, I stood with
Pierrot. All eyes were turned on me.</p>

<p>“What are they laughing at?” I asked, but he grinned, dusting the chalk
from my black cloak. “I cannot see; it must be something droll, perhaps
an honest thief!”</p>

<p>All eyes were turned on me.</p>

<p>“He has robbed you of your purse!” they laughed.</p>

<p>“My purse!” I cried; “Pierrot—help! it is a thief!”</p>

<p>They laughed: “He has robbed you of your purse!”</p>

<p>Then Truth stepped out, holding a mirror. “If he is an honest thief,”
cried Truth, “Pierrot shall find him with this mirror!” but he only
grinned, dusting the chalk from my black cloak.</p>

<p>“You see,” he said, “Truth is an honest thief, she brings you back your
mirror.”</p>

<p>All eyes were turned on me.</p>

<p>“Arrest Truth!” I cried, forgetting it was not a mirror but a purse I
lost, standing with Pierrot, there, where the throng was thickest in the
street.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00024">THE JESTER</h3>

<p>“Was she fair?” I asked, but he only chuckled, listening to the bells
jingling on his cap.</p>

<p>“Stabbed,” he tittered. “Think of the long journey, the days of peril,
the dreadful nights! Think how he wandered, for her sake, year after
year, through hostile lands, yearning for kith and kin, yearning for
her!”</p>

<p>“Stabbed,” he tittered, listening to the bells jingling on his cap.</p>

<p>“Was she fair?” I asked, but he only snarled, muttering to the bells
jingling on his cap.</p>

<p>“She kissed him at the gate,” he tittered, “but in the hall his
brother’s welcome touched his heart.”</p>

<p>“Was she fair?” I asked.</p>

<p>“Stabbed,” he chuckled. “Think of the long journey, the days of peril,
the dreadful nights! Think how he wandered, for her sake, year after
year through hostile lands, yearning for kith and kin, yearning for
her!”</p>

<p>“She kissed him at the gate, but in the hall his brother’s welcome
touched his heart.”</p>

<p>“Was she fair?” I asked; but he only snarled, listening to the bells
jingling in his cap.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00025">THE GREEN ROOM</h3>

<p>The Clown turned his powdered face to the mirror.</p>

<p>“If to be fair is to be beautiful,” he said, “who can compare with me in
my white mask?”</p>

<p>“Who can compare with him in his white mask?” I asked of Death beside
me.</p>

<p>“Who can compare with me?” said Death, “for I am paler still.”</p>

<p>“You are very beautiful,” sighed the Clown, turning his powdered face
from the mirror.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00026">THE LOVE TEST</h3>

<p>“If it is true that you love,” said Love, “then wait no longer. Give her
these jewels which would dishonour her and so dishonour you in loving
one dishonoured. If it is true that you love,” said Love, “then wait no
longer.”</p>

<p>I took the jewels and went to her, but she trod upon them, sobbing:
“Teach me to wait—I love you!”</p>

<p>“Then wait, if it is true,” said Love.</p>

<h2 id="pgepubid00027"><a id="THE_STREET_OF_THE_FOUR_WINDS"/>THE STREET OF THE FOUR WINDS</h2>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Ferme tes yeux à demi,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Croise tes bras sur ton sein,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Et de ton cœur endormi</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Chasse à jamais tout dessein.”</span></td></tr>
<tr><td class="center"><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span><span class="col2">*</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Je chante la nature,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Les étoiles du soir, les larmes du matin,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Les couchers de soleil à l’horizon lointain,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Le ciel qui parle au cœur d’existence future!”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<h3 id="pgepubid00028">I</h3>

<p>The animal paused on the threshold, interrogative, alert, ready for
flight if necessary. Severn laid down his palette, and held out a hand
of welcome. The cat remained motionless, her yellow eyes fastened upon
Severn.</p>

<p>“Puss,” he said, in his low, pleasant voice, “come in.”</p>

<p>The tip of her thin tail twitched uncertainly.</p>

<p>“Come in,” he said again.</p>

<p>Apparently she found his voice reassuring, for she slowly settled upon
all fours, her eyes still fastened upon him, her tail tucked under her
gaunt flanks.</p>

<p>He rose from his easel smiling. She eyed him quietly, and when he walked
toward her she watched him bend above her without a wince; her eyes
followed his hand until it touched her head. Then she uttered a ragged
mew.</p>

<p>It had long been Severn’s custom to converse with animals, probably
because he lived so much alone; and now he said, “What’s the matter,
puss?”</p>

<p>Her timid eyes sought his.</p>

<p>“I understand,” he said gently, “you shall have it at once.”</p>

<p>Then moving quietly about he busied himself with the duties of a host,
rinsed a saucer, filled it with the rest of the milk from the bottle on
the window-sill, and kneeling down, crumbled a roll into the hollow of
his hand.</p>

<p>The creature rose and crept toward the saucer.</p>

<p>With the handle of a palette-knife he stirred the crumbs and milk
together and stepped back as she thrust her nose into the mess. He
watched her in silence. From time to time the saucer clinked upon the
tiled floor as she reached for a morsel on the rim; and at last the
bread was all gone, and her purple tongue travelled over every unlicked
spot until the saucer shone like polished marble. Then she sat up, and
coolly turning her back to him, began her ablutions.</p>

<p>“Keep it up,” said Severn, much interested, “you need it.”</p>

<p>She flattened one ear, but neither turned nor interrupted her toilet. As
the grime was slowly removed Severn observed that nature had intended
her for a white cat. Her fur had disappeared in patches, from disease or
the chances of war, her tail was bony and her spine sharp. But what
charms she had were becoming apparent under vigorous licking, and he
waited until she had finished before re-opening the conversation. When
at last she closed her eyes and folded her forepaws under her breast, he
began again very gently: “Puss, tell me your troubles.”</p>

<p>At the sound of his voice she broke into a harsh rumbling which he
recognized as an attempt to purr. He bent over to rub her cheek and she
mewed again, an amiable inquiring little mew, to which he replied,
“Certainly, you are greatly improved, and when you recover your plumage
you will be a gorgeous bird.” Much flattered, she stood up and marched
around and around his legs, pushing her head between them and making
pleased remarks, to which he responded with grave politeness.</p>

<p>“Now, what sent you here,” he said—“here into the Street of the Four
Winds, and up five flights to the very door where you would be welcome?
What was it that prevented your meditated flight when I turned from my
canvas to encounter your yellow eyes? Are you a Latin Quarter cat as I
am a Latin Quarter man? And why do you wear a rose-coloured flowered
garter buckled about your neck?” The cat had climbed into his lap, and
now sat purring as he passed his hand over her thin coat.</p>

<p>“Excuse me,” he continued in lazy soothing tones, harmonizing with her
purring, “if I seem indelicate, but I cannot help musing on this
rose-coloured garter, flowered so quaintly and fastened with a silver
clasp. For the clasp is silver; I can see the mint mark on the edge, as
is prescribed by the law of the French Republic. Now, why is this garter
woven of rose silk and delicately embroidered,—why is this silken
garter with its silver clasp about your famished throat? Am I indiscreet
when I inquire if its owner is your owner? Is she some aged dame living
in memory of youthful vanities, fond, doting on you, decorating you with
her intimate personal attire? The circumference of the garter would
suggest this, for your neck is thin, and the garter fits you. But then
again I notice—I notice most things—that the garter is capable of
being much enlarged. These small silver-rimmed eyelets, of which I count
five, are proof of that. And now I observe that the fifth eyelet is worn
out, as though the tongue of the clasp were accustomed to lie there.
That seems to argue a well-rounded form.”</p>

<p>The cat curled her toes in contentment. The street was very still
outside.</p>

<p>He murmured on: “Why should your mistress decorate you with an article
most necessary to her at all times? Anyway, at most times. How did she
come to slip this bit of silk and silver about your neck? Was it the
caprice of a moment,—when you, before you had lost your pristine
plumpness, marched singing into her bedroom to bid her good-morning? Of
course, and she sat up among the pillows, her coiled hair tumbling to
her shoulders, as you sprang upon the bed purring: ‘Good-day, my lady.’
Oh, it is very easy to understand,” he yawned, resting his head on the
back of the chair. The cat still purred, tightening and relaxing her
padded claws over his knee.</p>

<p>“Shall I tell you all about her, cat? She is very beautiful—your
mistress,” he murmured drowsily, “and her hair is heavy as burnished
gold. I could paint her,—not on canvas—for I should need shades and
tones and hues and dyes more splendid than the iris of a splendid
rainbow. I could only paint her with closed eyes, for in dreams alone
can such colours as I need be found. For her eyes, I must have azure
from skies untroubled by a cloud—the skies of dreamland. For her lips,
roses from the palaces of slumberland, and for her brow, snow-drifts
from mountains which tower in fantastic pinnacles to the moons;—oh,
much higher than our moon here,—the crystal moons of dreamland. She
is—very—beautiful, your mistress.”</p>

<p>The words died on his lips and his eyelids drooped.</p>

<p>The cat, too, was asleep, her cheek turned up upon her wasted flank, her
paws relaxed and limp.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00029">II</h3>

<p>“It is fortunate,” said Severn, sitting up and stretching, “that we have
tided over the dinner hour, for I have nothing to offer you for supper
but what may be purchased with one silver franc.”</p>

<p>The cat on his knee rose, arched her back, yawned, and looked up at him.</p>

<p>“What shall it be? A roast chicken with salad? No? Possibly you prefer
beef? Of course,—and I shall try an egg and some white bread. Now for
the wines. Milk for you? Good. I shall take a little water, fresh from
the wood,” with a motion toward the bucket in the sink.</p>

<p>He put on his hat and left the room. The cat followed to the door, and
after he had closed it behind him, she settled down, smelling at the
cracks, and cocking one ear at every creak from the crazy old building.</p>

<p>The door below opened and shut. The cat looked serious, for a moment
doubtful, and her ears flattened in nervous expectation. Presently she
rose with a jerk of her tail and started on a noiseless tour of the
studio. She sneezed at a pot of turpentine, hastily retreating to the
table, which she presently mounted, and having satisfied her curiosity
concerning a roll of red modelling wax, returned to the door and sat
down with her eyes on the crack over the threshold. Then she lifted her
voice in a thin plaint.</p>

<p>When Severn returned he looked grave, but the cat, joyous and
demonstrative, marched around him, rubbing her gaunt body against his
legs, driving her head enthusiastically into his hand, and purring until
her voice mounted to a squeal.</p>

<p>He placed a bit of meat, wrapped in brown paper, upon the table, and
with a penknife cut it into shreds. The milk he took from a bottle which
had served for medicine, and poured it into the saucer on the hearth.</p>

<p>The cat crouched before it, purring and lapping at the same time.</p>

<p>He cooked his egg and ate it with a slice of bread, watching her busy
with the shredded meat, and when he had finished, and had filled and
emptied a cup of water from the bucket in the sink, he sat down, taking
her into his lap, where she at once curled up and began her toilet. He
began to speak again, touching her caressingly at times by way of
emphasis.</p>

<p>“Cat, I have found out where your mistress lives. It is not very far
away;—it is here, under this same leaky roof, but in the north wing
which I had supposed was uninhabited. My janitor tells me this. By
chance, he is almost sober this evening. The butcher on the rue de
Seine, where I bought your meat, knows you, and old Cabane the baker
identified you with needless sarcasm. They tell me hard tales of your
mistress which I shall not believe. They say she is idle and vain and
pleasure-loving; they say she is harebrained and reckless. The little
sculptor on the ground floor, who was buying rolls from old Cabane,
spoke to me to-night for the first time, although we have always bowed
to each other. He said she was very good and very beautiful. He has only
seen her once, and does not know her name. I thanked him;—I don’t know
why I thanked him so warmly. Cabane said, ‘Into this cursed Street of
the Four Winds, the four winds blow all things evil.’ The sculptor
looked confused, but when he went out with his rolls, he said to me, ‘I
am sure, Monsieur, that she is as good as she is beautiful.’”</p>

<p>The cat had finished her toilet, and now, springing softly to the floor,
went to the door and sniffed. He knelt beside her, and unclasping the
garter held it for a moment in his hands. After a while he said: “There
is a name engraved upon the silver clasp beneath the buckle. It is a
pretty name, Sylvia Elven. Sylvia is a woman’s name, Elven is the name
of a town. In Paris, in this quarter, above all, in this Street of the
Four Winds, names are worn and put away as the fashions change with the
seasons. I know the little town of Elven, for there I met Fate face to
face and Fate was unkind. But do you know that in Elven Fate had another
name, and that name was Sylvia?”</p>

<p>He replaced the garter and stood up looking down at the cat crouched
before the closed door.</p>

<p>“The name of Elven has a charm for me. It tells me of meadows and clear
rivers. The name of Sylvia troubles me like perfume from dead flowers.”</p>

<p>The cat mewed.</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” he said soothingly, “I will take you back. Your Sylvia is
not my Sylvia; the world is wide and Elven is not unknown. Yet in the
darkness and filth of poorer Paris, in the sad shadows of this ancient
house, these names are very pleasant to me.”</p>

<p>He lifted her in his arms and strode through the silent corridors to the
stairs. Down five flights and into the moonlit court, past the little
sculptor’s den, and then again in at the gate of the north wing and up
the worm-eaten stairs he passed, until he came to a closed door. When he
had stood knocking for a long time, something moved behind the door; it
opened and he went in. The room was dark. As he crossed the threshold,
the cat sprang from his arms into the shadows. He listened but heard
nothing. The silence was oppressive and he struck a match. At his elbow
stood a table and on the table a candle in a gilded candlestick. This he
lighted, then looked around. The chamber was vast, the hangings heavy
with embroidery. Over the fireplace towered a carved mantel, grey with
the ashes of dead fires. In a recess by the deep-set windows stood a
bed, from which the bedclothes, soft and fine as lace, trailed to the
polished floor. He lifted the candle above his head. A handkerchief lay
at his feet. It was faintly perfumed. He turned toward the windows. In
front of them was a <i>canapé</i> and over it were flung, pell-mell, a gown
of silk, a heap of lace-like garments, white and delicate as spiders’
meshes, long, crumpled gloves, and, on the floor beneath, the stockings,
the little pointed shoes, and one garter of rosy silk, quaintly flowered
and fitted with a silver clasp. Wondering, he stepped forward and drew
the heavy curtains from the bed. For a moment the candle flared in his
hand; then his eyes met two other eyes, wide open, smiling, and the
candle-flame flashed over hair heavy as gold.</p>

<p>She was pale, but not as white as he; her eyes were untroubled as a
child’s; but he stared, trembling from head to foot, while the candle
flickered in his hand.</p>

<p>At last he whispered: “Sylvia, it is I.”</p>

<p>Again he said, “It is I.”</p>

<p>Then, knowing that she was dead, he kissed her on the mouth. And through
the long watches of the night the cat purred on his knee, tightening and
relaxing her padded claws, until the sky paled above the Street of the
Four Winds.</p>

<h2 id="pgepubid00030"><a id="THE_STREET_OF_THE_FIRST_SHELL"/>THE STREET OF THE FIRST SHELL</h2>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Be of Good Cheer, the Sullen Month will die,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">And a young Moon requite us by and by:</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">Look how the Old one, meagre, bent, and wan</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.25em;">With age and Fast, is fainting from the sky.”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<h3 id="pgepubid00031">I</h3>

<p>The room was already dark. The high roofs opposite cut off what little
remained of the December daylight. The girl drew her chair nearer the
window, and choosing a large needle, threaded it, knotting the thread
over her fingers. Then she smoothed the baby garment across her knees,
and bending, bit off the thread and drew the smaller needle from where
it rested in the hem. When she had brushed away the stray threads and
bits of lace, she laid it again over her knees caressingly. Then she
slipped the threaded needle from her corsage and passed it through a
button, but as the button spun down the thread, her hand faltered, the
thread snapped, and the button rolled across the floor. She raised her
head. Her eyes were fixed on a strip of waning light above the chimneys.
From somewhere in the city came sounds like the distant beating of
drums, and beyond, far beyond, a vague muttering, now growing, swelling,
rumbling in the distance like the pounding of surf upon the rocks, now
like the surf again, receding, growling, menacing. The cold had become
intense, a bitter piercing cold which strained and snapped at joist and
beam and turned the slush of yesterday to flint. From the street below
every sound broke sharp and metallic—the clatter of sabots, the rattle
of shutters or the rare sound of a human voice. The air was heavy,
weighted with the black cold as with a pall. To breathe was painful, to
move an effort.</p>

<p>In the desolate sky there was something that wearied, in the brooding
clouds, something that saddened. It penetrated the freezing city cut by
the freezing river, the splendid city with its towers and domes, its
quays and bridges and its thousand spires. It entered the squares, it
seized the avenues and the palaces, stole across bridges and crept among
the narrow streets of the Latin Quarter, grey under the grey of the
December sky. Sadness, utter sadness. A fine icy sleet was falling,
powdering the pavement with a tiny crystalline dust. It sifted against
the window-panes and drifted in heaps along the sill. The light at the
window had nearly failed, and the girl bent low over her work. Presently
she raised her head, brushing the curls from her eyes.</p>

<p>“Jack?”</p>

<p>“Dearest?”</p>

<p>“Don’t forget to clean your palette.”</p>

<p>He said, “All right,” and picking up the palette, sat down upon the
floor in front of the stove. His head and shoulders were in the shadow,
but the firelight fell across his knees and glimmered red on the blade
of the palette-knife. Full in the firelight beside him stood a
colour-box. On the lid was carved,</p>

<table style="border:1px solid black; padding:2%; margin:3% auto 3% auto;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: center;">J. TRENT.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">École des Beaux Arts.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">1870.</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>This inscription was ornamented with an American and a French flag.</p>

<p>The sleet blew against the window-panes, covering them with stars and
diamonds, then, melting from the warmer air within, ran down and froze
again in fern-like traceries.</p>

<p>A dog whined and the patter of small paws sounded on the zinc behind the
stove.</p>

<p>“Jack, dear, do you think Hercules is hungry?”</p>

<p>The patter of paws was redoubled behind the stove.</p>

<p>“He’s whining,” she continued nervously, “and if it isn’t because he’s
hungry it is because—”</p>

<p>Her voice faltered. A loud humming filled the air, the windows vibrated.</p>

<p>“Oh, Jack,” she cried, “another—” but her voice was drowned in the
scream of a shell tearing through the clouds overhead.</p>

<p>“That is the nearest yet,” she murmured.</p>

<p>“Oh, no,” he answered cheerfully, “it probably fell way over by
Montmartre,” and as she did not answer, he said again with exaggerated
unconcern, “They wouldn’t take the trouble to fire at the Latin Quarter;
anyway they haven’t a battery that can hurt it.”</p>

<p>After a while she spoke up brightly: “Jack, dear, when are you going to
take me to see Monsieur West’s statues?”</p>

<p>“I will bet,” he said, throwing down his palette and walking over to the
window beside her, “that Colette has been here to-day.”</p>

<p>“Why?” she asked, opening her eyes very wide. Then, “Oh, it’s too
bad!—really, men are tiresome when they think they know everything! And
I warn you that if Monsieur West is vain enough to imagine that
Colette—”</p>

<p>From the north another shell came whistling and quavering through the
sky, passing above them with long-drawn screech which left the windows
singing.</p>

<p>“That,” he blurted out, “was too near for comfort.”</p>

<p>They were silent for a while, then he spoke again gaily: “Go on, Sylvia,
and wither poor West;” but she only sighed, “Oh, dear, I can never seem
to get used to the shells.”</p>

<p>He sat down on the arm of the chair beside her.</p>

<p>Her scissors fell jingling to the floor; she tossed the unfinished frock
after them, and putting both arms about his neck drew him down into her
lap.</p>

<p>“Don’t go out to-night, Jack.”</p>

<p>He kissed her uplifted face; “You know I must; don’t make it hard for
me.”</p>

<p>“But when I hear the shells and—and know you are out in the city—”</p>

<p>“But they all fall in Montmartre—”</p>

<p>“They may all fall in the Beaux Arts; you said yourself that two struck
the Quai d’Orsay—”</p>

<p>“Mere accident—”</p>

<p>“Jack, have pity on me! Take me with you!”</p>

<p>“And who will there be to get dinner?”</p>

<p>She rose and flung herself on the bed.</p>

<p>“Oh, I can’t get used to it, and I know you must go, but I beg you not
to be late to dinner. If you knew what I suffer! I—I—cannot help it,
and you must be patient with me, dear.”</p>

<p>He said, “It is as safe there as it is in our own house.”</p>

<p>She watched him fill for her the alcohol lamp, and when he had lighted
it and had taken his hat to go, she jumped up and clung to him in
silence. After a moment he said: “Now, Sylvia, remember my courage is
sustained by yours. Come, I must go!” She did not move, and he repeated:
“I must go.” Then she stepped back and he thought she was going to speak
and waited, but she only looked at him, and, a little impatiently, he
kissed her again, saying: “Don’t worry, dearest.”</p>

<p>When he had reached the last flight of stairs on his way to the street a
woman hobbled out of the house-keeper’s lodge waving a letter and
calling: “Monsieur Jack! Monsieur Jack! this was left by Monsieur
Fallowby!”</p>

<p>He took the letter, and leaning on the threshold of the lodge, read it:</p>

<div class="blockquot">
<p>“Dear Jack,</p>

<p>“I believe Braith is dead broke and I’m sure Fallowby is. Braith swears
he isn’t, and Fallowby swears he is, so you can draw your own
conclusions. I’ve got a scheme for a dinner, and if it works, I will let
you fellows in.</p>

<p class="r">“Yours faithfully,            <br/>
“W<small>EST</small>.</p>

<p>“P.S.—Fallowby has shaken Hartman and his gang, thank the Lord! There
is something rotten there,—or it may be he’s only a miser.</p>

<p>“P.P.S.—I’m more desperately in love than ever, but I’m sure she does
not care a straw for me.”</p>
</div>

<p>“All right,” said Trent, with a smile, to the concierge; “but tell me,
how is Papa Cottard?”</p>

<p>The old woman shook her head and pointed to the curtained bed in the
lodge.</p>

<p>“Père Cottard!” he cried cheerily, “how goes the wound to-day?”</p>

<p>He walked over to the bed and drew the curtains. An old man was lying
among the tumbled sheets.</p>

<p>“Better?” smiled Trent.</p>

<p>“Better,” repeated the man wearily; and, after a pause, “Have you any
news, Monsieur Jack?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t been out to-day. I will bring you any rumour I may hear,
though goodness knows I’ve got enough of rumours,” he muttered to
himself. Then aloud: “Cheer up; you’re looking better.”</p>

<p>“And the sortie?”</p>

<p>“Oh, the sortie, that’s for this week. General Trochu sent orders last
night.”</p>

<p>“It will be terrible.”</p>

<p>“It will be sickening,” thought Trent as he went out into the street and
turned the corner toward the rue de Seine; “slaughter, slaughter, phew!
I’m glad I’m not going.”</p>

<p>The street was almost deserted. A few women muffled in tattered military
capes crept along the frozen pavement, and a wretchedly clad gamin
hovered over the sewer-hole on the corner of the Boulevard. A rope
around his waist held his rags together. From the rope hung a rat, still
warm and bleeding.</p>

<p>“There’s another in there,” he yelled at Trent; “I hit him but he got
away.”</p>

<p>Trent crossed the street and asked: “How much?”</p>

<p>“Two francs for a quarter of a fat one; that’s what they give at the St.
Germain Market.”</p>

<p>A violent fit of coughing interrupted him, but he wiped his face with
the palm of his hand and looked cunningly at Trent.</p>

<p>“Last week you could buy a rat for six francs, but,” and here he swore
vilely, “the rats have quit the rue de Seine and they kill them now over
by the new hospital. I’ll let you have this for seven francs; I can sell
it for ten in the Isle St. Louis.”</p>

<p>“You lie,” said Trent, “and let me tell you that if you try to swindle
anybody in this quarter the people will make short work of you and your
rats.”</p>

<p>He stood a moment eyeing the gamin, who pretended to snivel. Then he
tossed him a franc, laughing. The child caught it, and thrusting it into
his mouth wheeled about to the sewer-hole. For a second he crouched,
motionless, alert, his eyes on the bars of the drain, then leaping
forward he hurled a stone into the gutter, and Trent left him to finish
a fierce grey rat that writhed squealing at the mouth of the sewer.</p>

<p>“Suppose Braith should come to that,” he thought; “poor little chap;”
and hurrying, he turned in the dirty passage des Beaux Arts and entered
the third house to the left.</p>

<p>“Monsieur is at home,” quavered the old concierge.</p>

<p>Home? A garret absolutely bare, save for the iron bedstead in the corner
and the iron basin and pitcher on the floor.</p>

<p>West appeared at the door, winking with much mystery, and motioned Trent
to enter. Braith, who was painting in bed to keep warm, looked up,
laughed, and shook hands.</p>

<p>“Any news?”</p>

<p>The perfunctory question was answered as usual by: “Nothing but the
cannon.”</p>

<p>Trent sat down on the bed.</p>

<p>“Where on earth did you get that?” he demanded, pointing to a
half-finished chicken nestling in a wash-basin.</p>

<p>West grinned.</p>

<p>“Are you millionaires, you two? Out with it.”</p>

<p>Braith, looking a little ashamed, began, “Oh, it’s one of West’s
exploits,” but was cut short by West, who said he would tell the story
himself.</p>

<p>“You see, before the siege, I had a letter of introduction to a ‘<i>type</i>’
here, a fat banker, German-American variety. You know the species, I
see. Well, of course I forgot to present the letter, but this morning,
judging it to be a favourable opportunity, I called on him.</p>

<p>“The villain lives in comfort;—fires, my boy!—fires in the ante-rooms!
The Buttons finally condescends to carry my letter and card up, leaving
me standing in the hallway, which I did not like, so I entered the first
room I saw and nearly fainted at the sight of a banquet on a table by
the fire. Down comes Buttons, very insolent. No, oh, no, his master, ‘is
not at home, and in fact is too busy to receive letters of introduction
just now; the siege, and many business difficulties—’</p>

<p>“I deliver a kick to Buttons, pick up this chicken from the table, toss
my card on to the empty plate, and addressing Buttons as a species of
Prussian pig, march out with the honours of war.”</p>

<p>Trent shook his head.</p>

<p>“I forgot to say that Hartman often dines there, and I draw my own
conclusions,” continued West. “Now about this chicken, half of it is for
Braith and myself, and half for Colette, but of course you will help me
eat my part because I’m not hungry.”</p>

<p>“Neither am I,” began Braith, but Trent, with a smile at the pinched
faces before him, shook his head saying, “What nonsense! You know I’m
never hungry!”</p>

<p>West hesitated, reddened, and then slicing off Braith’s portion, but not
eating any himself, said good-night, and hurried away to number 470 rue
Serpente, where lived a pretty girl named Colette, orphan after Sedan,
and Heaven alone knew where she got the roses in her cheeks, for the
siege came hard on the poor.</p>

<p>“That chicken will delight her, but I really believe she’s in love with
West,” said Trent. Then walking over to the bed: “See here, old man, no
dodging, you know, how much have you left?”</p>

<p>The other hesitated and flushed.</p>

<p>“Come, old chap,” insisted Trent.</p>

<p>Braith drew a purse from beneath his bolster, and handed it to his
friend with a simplicity that touched him.</p>

<p>“Seven sons,” he counted; “you make me tired! Why on earth don’t you
come to me? I take it d——d ill, Braith! How many times must I go over
the same thing and explain to you that because I have money it is my
duty to share it, and your duty and the duty of every American to share
it with me? You can’t get a cent, the city’s blockaded, and the American
Minister has his hands full with all the German riff-raff and deuce
knows what! Why don’t you act sensibly?”</p>

<p>“I—I will, Trent, but it’s an obligation that perhaps I can never even
in part repay, I’m poor and—”</p>

<p>“Of course you’ll pay me! If I were a usurer I would take your talent
for security. When you are rich and famous—”</p>

<p>“Don’t, Trent—”</p>

<p>“All right, only no more monkey business.”</p>

<p>He slipped a dozen gold pieces into the purse, and tucking it again
under the mattress smiled at Braith.</p>

<p>“How old are you?” he demanded.</p>

<p>“Sixteen.”</p>

<p>Trent laid his hand lightly on his friend’s shoulder. “I’m twenty-two,
and I have the rights of a grandfather as far as you are concerned.
You’ll do as I say until you’re twenty-one.”</p>

<p>“The siège will be over then, I hope,” said Braith, trying to laugh, but
the prayer in their hearts: “How long, O Lord, how long!” was answered
by the swift scream of a shell soaring among the storm-clouds of that
December night.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00032">II</h3>

<p>West, standing in the doorway of a house in the rue Serpentine, was
speaking angrily. He said he didn’t care whether Hartman liked it or
not; he was telling him, not arguing with him.</p>

<p>“You call yourself an American!” he sneered; “Berlin and hell are full
of that kind of American. You come loafing about Colette with your
pockets stuffed with white bread and beef, and a bottle of wine at
thirty francs and you can’t really afford to give a dollar to the
American Ambulance and Public Assistance, which Braith does, and he’s
half starved!”</p>

<p>Hartman retreated to the curbstone, but West followed him, his face like
a thunder-cloud. “Don’t you dare to call yourself a countryman of mine,”
he growled,—“no,—nor an artist either! Artists don’t worm themselves
into the service of the Public Defence where they do nothing but feed
like rats on the people’s food! And I’ll tell you now,” he continued
dropping his voice, for Hartman had started as though stung, “you might
better keep away from that Alsatian Brasserie and the smug-faced thieves
who haunt it. You know what they do with suspects!”</p>

<p>“You lie, you hound!” screamed Hartman, and flung the bottle in his hand
straight at West’s face. West had him by the throat in a second, and
forcing him against the dead wall shook him wickedly.</p>

<p>“Now you listen to me,” he muttered, through his clenched teeth. “You
are already a suspect and—I swear—I believe you are a paid spy! It
isn’t my business to detect such vermin, and I don’t intend to denounce
you, but understand this! Colette don’t like you and I can’t stand you,
and if I catch you in this street again I’ll make it somewhat
unpleasant. Get out, you sleek Prussian!”</p>

<p>Hartman had managed to drag a knife from his pocket, but West tore it
from him and hurled him into the gutter. A gamin who had seen this burst
into a peal of laughter, which rattled harshly in the silent street.
Then everywhere windows were raised and rows of haggard faces appeared
demanding to know why people should laugh in the starving city.</p>

<p>“Is it a victory?” murmured one.</p>

<p>“Look at that,” cried West as Hartman picked himself up from the
pavement, “look! you miser! look at those faces!” But Hartman gave <i>him</i>
a look which he never forgot, and walked away without a word. Trent, who
suddenly appeared at the corner, glanced curiously at West, who merely
nodded toward his door saying, “Come in; Fallowby’s upstairs.”</p>

<p>“What are you doing with that knife?” demanded Fallowby, as he and Trent
entered the studio.</p>

<p>West looked at his wounded hand, which still clutched the knife, but
saying, “Cut myself by accident,” tossed it into a corner and washed the
blood from his fingers.</p>

<p>Fallowby, fat and lazy, watched him without comment, but Trent, half
divining how things had turned, walked over to Fallowby smiling.</p>

<p>“I’ve a bone to pick with you!” he said.</p>

<p>“Where is it? I’m hungry,” replied Fallowby with affected eagerness, but
Trent, frowning, told him to listen.</p>

<p>“How much did I advance you a week ago?”</p>

<p>“Three hundred and eighty francs,” replied the other, with a squirm of
contrition.</p>

<p>“Where is it?”</p>

<p>Fallowby began a series of intricate explanations, which were soon cut
short by Trent.</p>

<p>“I know; you blew it in;—you always blow it in. I don’t care a rap what
you did before the siege: I know you are rich and have a right to
dispose of your money as you wish to, and I also know that, generally
speaking, it is none of my business. But <i>now</i> it is my business, as I
have to supply the funds until you get some more, which you won’t until
the siege is ended one way or another. I wish to share what I have, but
I won’t see it thrown out of the window. Oh, yes, of course I know you
will reimburse me, but that isn’t the question; and, anyway, it’s the
opinion of your friends, old man, that you will not be worse off for a
little abstinence from fleshly pleasures. You are positively a freak in
this famine-cursed city of skeletons!”</p>

<p>“I <i>am</i> rather stout,” he admitted.</p>

<p>“Is it true you are out of money?” demanded Trent.</p>

<p>“Yes, I am,” sighed the other.</p>

<p>“That roast sucking pig on the rue St. Honoré,—is it there yet?”
continued Trent.</p>

<p>“Wh—at?” stammered the feeble one.</p>

<p>“Ah—I thought so! I caught you in ecstasy before that sucking pig at
least a dozen times!”</p>

<p>Then laughing, he presented Fallowby with a roll of twenty franc pieces
saying: “If these go for luxuries you must live on your own flesh,” and
went over to aid West, who sat beside the wash-basin binding up his
hand.</p>

<p>West suffered him to tie the knot, and then said: “You remember,
yesterday, when I left you and Braith to take the chicken to Colette.”</p>

<p>“Chicken! Good heavens!” moaned Fallowby.</p>

<p>“Chicken,” repeated West, enjoying Fallowby’s grief;—“I—that is, I
must explain that things are changed. Colette and I—are to be
married—”</p>

<p>“What—what about the chicken?” groaned Fallowby.</p>

<p>“Shut up!” laughed Trent, and slipping his arm through West’s, walked to
the stairway.</p>

<p>“The poor little thing,” said West, “just think, not a splinter of
firewood for a week and wouldn’t tell me because she thought I needed it
for my clay figure. Whew! When I heard it I smashed that smirking clay
nymph to pieces, and the rest can freeze and be hanged!” After a moment
he added timidly: “Won’t you call on your way down and say <i>bon soir</i>?
It’s No. 17.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Trent, and he went out softly closing the door behind.</p>

<p>He stopped on the third landing, lighted a match, scanned the numbers
over the row of dingy doors, and knocked at No. 17.</p>

<p>“C’est toi Georges?” The door opened.</p>

<p>“Oh, pardon, Monsieur Jack, I thought it was Monsieur West,” then
blushing furiously, “Oh, I see you have heard! Oh, thank you so much for
your wishes, and I’m sure we love each other very much,—and I’m dying
to see Sylvia and tell her and—”</p>

<p>“And what?” laughed Trent.</p>

<p>“I am very happy,” she sighed.</p>

<p>“He’s pure gold,” returned Trent, and then gaily: “I want you and George
to come and dine with us to-night. It’s a little treat,—you see
to-morrow is Sylvia’s <i>fête</i>. She will be nineteen. I have written to
Thorne, and the Guernalecs will come with their cousin Odile. Fallowby
has engaged not to bring anybody but himself.”</p>

<p>The girl accepted shyly, charging him with loads of loving messages to
Sylvia, and he said good-night.</p>

<p>He started up the street, walking swiftly, for it was bitter cold, and
cutting across the rue de la Lune he entered the rue de Seine. The early
winter night had fallen, almost without warning, but the sky was clear
and myriads of stars glittered in the heavens. The bombardment had
become furious—a steady rolling thunder from the Prussian cannon
punctuated by the heavy shocks from Mont Valérien.</p>

<p>The shells streamed across the sky leaving trails like shooting stars,
and now, as he turned to look back, rockets blue and red flared above
the horizon from the Fort of Issy, and the Fortress of the North flamed
like a bonfire.</p>

<p>“Good news!” a man shouted over by the Boulevard St. Germain. As if by
magic the streets were filled with people,—shivering, chattering people
with shrunken eyes.</p>

<p>“Jacques!” cried one. “The Army of the Loire!”</p>

<p>“Eh! <i>mon vieux</i>, it has come then at last! I told thee! I told thee!
To-morrow—to-night—who knows?”</p>

<p>“Is it true? Is it a sortie?”</p>

<p>Some one said: “Oh, God—a sortie—and my son?” Another cried: “To the
Seine? They say one can see the signals of the Army of the Loire from
the Pont Neuf.”</p>

<p>There was a child standing near Trent who kept repeating: “Mamma, Mamma,
then to-morrow we may eat white bread?” and beside him, an old man
swaying, stumbling, his shrivelled hands crushed to his breast,
muttering as if insane.</p>

<p>“Could it be true? Who has heard the news? The shoemaker on the rue de
Buci had it from a Mobile who had heard a Franctireur repeat it to a
captain of the National Guard.”</p>

<p>Trent followed the throng surging through the rue de Seine to the river.</p>

<p>Rocket after rocket clove the sky, and now, from Montmartre, the cannon
clanged, and the batteries on Montparnasse joined in with a crash. The
bridge was packed with people.</p>

<p>Trent asked: “Who has seen the signals of the Army of the Loire?”</p>

<p>“We are waiting for them,” was the reply.</p>

<p>He looked toward the north. Suddenly the huge silhouette of the Arc de
Triomphe sprang into black relief against the flash of a cannon. The
boom of the gun rolled along the quay and the old bridge vibrated.</p>

<p>Again over by the Point du Jour a flash and heavy explosion shook the
bridge, and then the whole eastern bastion of the fortifications blazed
and crackled, sending a red flame into the sky.</p>

<p>“Has any one seen the signals yet?” he asked again.</p>

<p>“We are waiting,” was the reply.</p>

<p>“Yes, waiting,” murmured a man behind him, “waiting, sick, starved,
freezing, but waiting. Is it a sortie? They go gladly. Is it to starve?
They starve. They have no time to think of surrender. Are they
heroes,—these Parisians? Answer me, Trent!”</p>

<p>The American Ambulance surgeon turned about and scanned the parapets of
the bridge.</p>

<p>“Any news, Doctor,” asked Trent mechanically.</p>

<p>“News?” said the doctor; “I don’t know any;—I haven’t time to know any.
What are these people after?”</p>

<p>“They say that the Army of the Loire has signalled Mont Valérien.”</p>

<p>“Poor devils.” The doctor glanced about him for an instant, and then:
“I’m so harried and worried that I don’t know what to do. After the last
sortie we had the work of fifty ambulances on our poor little corps.
To-morrow there’s another sortie, and I wish you fellows could come over
to headquarters. We may need volunteers. How is madame?” he added
abruptly.</p>

<p>“Well,” replied Trent, “but she seems to grow more nervous every day. I
ought to be with her now.”</p>

<p>“Take care of her,” said the doctor, then with a sharp look at the
people: “I can’t stop now—good-night!” and he hurried away muttering,
“Poor devils!”</p>

<p>Trent leaned over the parapet and blinked at the black river surging
through the arches. Dark objects, carried swiftly on the breast of the
current, struck with a grinding tearing noise against the stone piers,
spun around for an instant, and hurried away into the darkness. The ice
from the Marne.</p>

<p>As he stood staring into the water, a hand was laid on his shoulder.
“Hello, Southwark!” he cried, turning around; “this is a queer place for
you!”</p>

<p>“Trent, I have something to tell you. Don’t stay here,—don’t believe in
the Army of the Loire:” and the <i>attaché</i> of the American Legation
slipped his arm through Trent’s and drew him toward the Louvre.</p>

<p>“Then it’s another lie!” said Trent bitterly.</p>

<p>“Worse—we know at the Legation—I can’t speak of it. But that’s not
what I have to say. Something happened this afternoon. The Alsatian
Brasserie was visited and an American named Hartman has been arrested.
Do you know him?”</p>

<p>“I know a German who calls himself an American;—his name is Hartman.”</p>

<p>“Well, he was arrested about two hours ago. They mean to shoot him.”</p>

<p>“What!”</p>

<p>“Of course we at the Legation can’t allow them to shoot him off-hand,
but the evidence seems conclusive.”</p>

<p>“Is he a spy?”</p>

<p>“Well, the papers seized in his rooms are pretty damning proofs, and
besides he was caught, they say, swindling the Public Food Committee. He
drew rations for fifty, how, I don’t know. He claims to be an American
artist here, and we have been obliged to take notice of it at the
Legation. It’s a nasty affair.”</p>

<p>“To cheat the people at such a time is worse than robbing the poor-box,”
cried Trent angrily. “Let them shoot him!”</p>

<p>“He’s an American citizen.”</p>

<p>“Yes, oh yes,” said the other with bitterness. “American citizenship is
a precious privilege when every goggle-eyed German—” His anger choked
him.</p>

<p>Southwark shook hands with him warmly. “It can’t be helped, we must own
the carrion. I am afraid you may be called upon to identify him as an
American artist,” he said with a ghost of a smile on his deep-lined
face; and walked away through the Cours la Reine.</p>

<p>Trent swore silently for a moment and then drew out his watch. Seven
o’clock. “Sylvia will be anxious,” he thought, and hurried back to the
river. The crowd still huddled shivering on the bridge, a sombre pitiful
congregation, peering out into the night for the signals of the Army of
the Loire: and their hearts beat time to the pounding of the guns, their
eyes lighted with each flash from the bastions, and hope rose with the
drifting rockets.</p>

<p>A black cloud hung over the fortifications. From horizon to horizon the
cannon smoke stretched in wavering bands, now capping the spires and
domes with cloud, now blowing in streamers and shreds along the streets,
now descending from the housetops, enveloping quays, bridges, and river,
in a sulphurous mist. And through the smoke pall the lightning of the
cannon played, while from time to time a rift above showed a fathomless
black vault set with stars.</p>

<p>He turned again into the rue de Seine, that sad abandoned street, with
its rows of closed shutters and desolate ranks of unlighted lamps. He
was a little nervous and wished once or twice for a revolver, but the
slinking forms which passed him in the darkness were too weak with
hunger to be dangerous, he thought, and he passed on unmolested to his
doorway. But there somebody sprang at his throat. Over and over the icy
pavement he rolled with his assailant, tearing at the noose about his
neck, and then with a wrench sprang to his feet.</p>

<p>“Get up,” he cried to the other.</p>

<p>Slowly and with great deliberation, a small gamin picked himself out of
the gutter and surveyed Trent with disgust.</p>

<p>“That’s a nice clean trick,” said Trent; “a whelp of your age! You’ll
finish against a dead wall! Give me that cord!”</p>

<p>The urchin handed him the noose without a word.</p>

<p>Trent struck a match and looked at his assailant. It was the rat-killer
of the day before.</p>

<p>“H’m! I thought so,” he muttered.</p>

<p>“Tiens, c’est toi?” said the gamin tranquilly.</p>

<p>The impudence, the overpowering audacity of the ragamuffin took Trent’s
breath away.</p>

<p>“Do you know, you young strangler,” he gasped, “that they shoot thieves
of your age?”</p>

<p>The child turned a passionless face to Trent. “Shoot, then.”</p>

<p>That was too much, and he turned on his heel and entered his hotel.</p>

<p>Groping up the unlighted stairway, he at last reached his own landing
and felt about in the darkness for the door. From his studio came the
sound of voices, West’s hearty laugh and Fallowby’s chuckle, and at last
he found the knob and, pushing back the door, stood a moment confused by
the light.</p>

<p>“Hello, Jack!” cried West, “you’re a pleasant creature, inviting people
to dine and letting them wait. Here’s Fallowby weeping with hunger—”</p>

<p>“Shut up,” observed the latter, “perhaps he’s been out to buy a turkey.”</p>

<p>“He’s been out garroting, look at his noose!” laughed Guernalec.</p>

<p>“So now we know where you get your cash!” added West; “vive le coup du
Père François!”</p>

<p>Trent shook hands with everybody and laughed at Sylvia’s pale face.</p>

<p>“I didn’t mean to be late; I stopped on the bridge a moment to watch the
bombardment. Were you anxious, Sylvia?”</p>

<p>She smiled and murmured, “Oh, no!” but her hand dropped into his and
tightened convulsively.</p>

<p>“To the table!” shouted Fallowby, and uttered a joyous whoop.</p>

<p>“Take it easy,” observed Thorne, with a remnant of manners; “you are not
the host, you know.”</p>

<p>Marie Guernalec, who had been chattering with Colette, jumped up and
took Thorne’s arm and Monsieur Guernalec drew Odile’s arm through his.</p>

<p>Trent, bowing gravely, offered his own arm to Colette, West took in
Sylvia, and Fallowby hovered anxiously in the rear.</p>

<p>“You march around the table three times singing the Marseillaise,”
explained Sylvia, “and Monsieur Fallowby pounds on the table and beats
time.”</p>

<p>Fallowby suggested that they could sing after dinner, but his protest
was drowned in the ringing chorus—</p>

<p class="c">“Aux armes!<br/>
Formez vos bataillons!”</p>

<p class="nind">Around the room they marched singing,</p>

<p class="c">“Marchons! Marchons!”</p>

<p class="nind">with all their might, while Fallowby with very bad grace, hammered on
the table, consoling himself a little with the hope that the exercise
would increase his appetite. Hercules, the black and tan, fled under the
bed, from which retreat he yapped and whined until dragged out by
Guernalec and placed in Odile’s lap.</p>

<p>“And now,” said Trent gravely, when everybody was seated, “listen!” and
he read the menu.</p>

<table style="margin:2% auto 2% auto; border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: center;">Beef Soup à la Siège de Paris.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">———</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Fish.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Sardines à la père Lachaise.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">(White Wine).</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">———</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Rôti (Red Wine).</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Fresh Beef à la sortie.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">———</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Vegetables.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Canned Beans à la chasse-pot,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Canned Peas Gravelotte,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Potatoes Irlandaises,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Miscellaneous.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">———</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Cold Corned Beef à la Thieis,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Stewed Prunes à la Garibaldi.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">———</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Dessert.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Dried prunes—White bread,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Currant Jelly,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Tea—Café,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Liqueurs,</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center;">Pipes and Cigarettes.</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>Fallowby applauded frantically, and Sylvia served the soup.</p>

<p>“Isn’t it delicious?” sighed Odile.</p>

<p>Marie Guernalec sipped her soup in rapture.</p>

<p>“Not at all like horse, and I don’t care what they say, horse doesn’t
taste like beef,” whispered Colette to West. Fallowby, who had finished,
began to caress his chin and eye the tureen.</p>

<p>“Have some more, old chap?” inquired Trent.</p>

<p>“Monsieur Fallowby cannot have any more,” announced Sylvia; “I am saving
this for the concierge.” Fallowby transferred his eyes to the fish.</p>

<p>The sardines, hot from the grille, were a great success. While the
others were eating Sylvia ran downstairs with the soup for the old
concierge and her husband, and when she hurried back, flushed and
breathless, and had slipped into her chair with a happy smile at Trent,
that young man arose, and silence fell over the table. For an instant he
looked at Sylvia and thought he had never seen her so beautiful.</p>

<p>“You all know,” he began, “that to-day is my wife’s nineteenth
birthday—”</p>

<p>Fallowby, bubbling with enthusiasm, waved his glass in circles about his
head to the terror of Odile and Colette, his neighbours, and Thorne,
West and Guernalec refilled their glasses three times before the storm
of applause which the toast of Sylvia had provoked, subsided.</p>

<p>Three times the glasses were filled and emptied to Sylvia, and again to
Trent, who protested.</p>

<p>“This is irregular,” he cried, “the next toast is to the twin Republics,
France and America?”</p>

<p>“To the Republics! To the Republics!” they cried, and the toast was
drunk amid shouts of “Vive la France! Vive l’Amérique! Vive la Nation!”</p>

<p>Then Trent, with a smile at West, offered the toast, “To a Happy Pair!”
and everybody understood, and Sylvia leaned over and kissed Colette,
while Trent bowed to West.</p>

<p>The beef was eaten in comparative calm, but when it was finished and a
portion of it set aside for the old people below, Trent cried: “Drink to
Paris! May she rise from her ruins and crush the invader!” and the
cheers rang out, drowning for a moment the monotonous thunder of the
Prussian guns.</p>

<p>Pipes and cigarettes were lighted, and Trent listened an instant to the
animated chatter around him, broken by ripples of laughter from the
girls or the mellow chuckle of Fallowby. Then he turned to West.</p>

<p>“There is going to be a sortie to-night,” he said. “I saw the American
Ambulance surgeon just before I came in and he asked me to speak to you
fellows. Any aid we can give him will not come amiss.”</p>

<p>Then dropping his voice and speaking in English, “As for me, I shall go
out with the ambulance to-morrow morning. There is of course no danger,
but it’s just as well to keep it from Sylvia.”</p>

<p>West nodded. Thorne and Guernalec, who had heard, broke in and offered
assistance, and Fallowby volunteered with a groan.</p>

<p>“All right,” said Trent rapidly,—“no more now, but meet me at Ambulance
headquarters to-morrow morning at eight.”</p>

<p>Sylvia and Colette, who were becoming uneasy at the conversation in
English, now demanded to know what they were talking about.</p>

<p>“What does a sculptor usually talk about?” cried West, with a laugh.</p>

<p>Odile glanced reproachfully at Thorne, her <i>fiancé</i>.</p>

<p>“You are not French, you know, and it is none of your business, this
war,” said Odile with much dignity.</p>

<p>Thorne looked meek, but West assumed an air of outraged virtue.</p>

<p>“It seems,” he said to Fallowby, “that a fellow cannot discuss the
beauties of Greek sculpture in his mother tongue, without being openly
suspected.”</p>

<p>Colette placed her hand over his mouth and turning to Sylvia, murmured,
“They are horridly untruthful, these men.”</p>

<p>“I believe the word for ambulance is the same in both languages,” said
Marie Guernalec saucily; “Sylvia, don’t trust Monsieur Trent.”</p>

<p>“Jack,” whispered Sylvia, “promise me—”</p>

<p>A knock at the studio door interrupted her.</p>

<p>“Come in!” cried Fallowby, but Trent sprang up, and opening the door,
looked out. Then with a hasty excuse to the rest, he stepped into the
hallway and closed the door.</p>

<p>When he returned he was grumbling.</p>

<p>“What is it, Jack?” cried West.</p>

<p>“What is it?” repeated Trent savagely; “I’ll tell you what it is. I have
received a dispatch from the American Minister to go at once and
identify and claim, as a fellow-countryman and a brother artist, a
rascally thief and a German spy!”</p>

<p>“Don’t go,” suggested Fallowby.</p>

<p>“If I don’t they’ll shoot him at once.”</p>

<p>“Let them,” growled Thorne.</p>

<p>“Do you fellows know who it is?”</p>

<p>“Hartman!” shouted West, inspired.</p>

<p>Sylvia sprang up deathly white, but Odile slipped her arm around her and
supported her to a chair, saying calmly, “Sylvia has fainted,—it’s the
hot room,—bring some water.”</p>

<p>Trent brought it at once.</p>

<p>Sylvia opened her eyes, and after a moment rose, and supported by Marie
Guernalec and Trent, passed into the bedroom.</p>

<p>It was the signal for breaking up, and everybody came and shook hands
with Trent, saying they hoped Sylvia would sleep it off and that it
would be nothing.</p>

<p>When Marie Guernalec took leave of him, she avoided his eyes, but he
spoke to her cordially and thanked her for her aid.</p>

<p>“Anything I can do, Jack?” inquired West, lingering, and then hurried
downstairs to catch up with the rest.</p>

<p>Trent leaned over the banisters, listening to their footsteps and
chatter, and then the lower door banged and the house was silent. He
lingered, staring down into the blackness, biting his lips; then with an
impatient movement, “I am crazy!” he muttered, and lighting a candle,
went into the bedroom. Sylvia was lying on the bed. He bent over her,
smoothing the curly hair on her forehead.</p>

<p>“Are you better, dear Sylvia?”</p>

<p>She did not answer, but raised her eyes to his. For an instant he met
her gaze, but what he read there sent a chill to his heart and he sat
down covering his face with his hands.</p>

<p>At last she spoke in a voice, changed and strained,—a voice which he
had never heard, and he dropped his hands and listened, bolt upright in
his chair.</p>

<p>“Jack, it has come at last. I have feared it and trembled,—ah! how
often have I lain awake at night with this on my heart and prayed that I
might die before you should ever know of it! For I love you, Jack, and
if you go away I cannot live. I have deceived you;—it happened before I
knew you, but since that first day when you found me weeping in the
Luxembourg and spoke to me, Jack, I have been faithful to you in every
thought and deed. I loved you from the first, and did not dare to tell
you this—fearing that you would go away; and since then my love has
grown—grown—and oh! I suffered!—but I dared not tell you. And now you
know, but you do not know the worst. For him—now—what do I care? He
was cruel—oh, so cruel!”</p>

<p>She hid her face in her arms.</p>

<p>“Must I go on? Must I tell you—can you not imagine, oh! Jack—”</p>

<p>He did not stir; his eyes seemed dead.</p>

<p>“I—I was so young, I knew nothing, and he said—said that he loved
me—”</p>

<p>Trent rose and struck the candle with his clenched fist, and the room
was dark.</p>

<p>The bells of St. Sulpice tolled the hour, and she started up, speaking
with feverish haste,—“I must finish! When you told me you loved
me—you—you asked me nothing; but then, even then, it was too late, and
<i>that other life</i> which binds me to him, must stand for ever between you
and me! For there <i>is another</i> whom he has claimed, and is good to. He
must not die,—they cannot shoot him, for that <i>other’s</i> sake!”</p>

<p>Trent sat motionless, but his thoughts ran on in an interminable whirl.</p>

<p>Sylvia, little Sylvia, who shared with him his student life,—who bore
with him the dreary desolation of the siege without complaint,—this
slender blue-eyed girl whom he was so quietly fond of, whom he teased or
caressed as the whim suited, who sometimes made him the least bit
impatient with her passionate devotion to him,—could this be the same
Sylvia who lay weeping there in the darkness?</p>

<p>Then he clinched his teeth. “Let him die! Let him die!”—but then,—for
Sylvia’s sake, and,—for that <i>other’s</i> sake,—Yes, he would go,—he
<i>must</i> go,—his duty was plain before him. But Sylvia,—he could not be
what he had been to her, and yet a vague terror seized him, now all was
said. Trembling, he struck a light.</p>

<p>She lay there, her curly hair tumbled about her face, her small white
hands pressed to her breast.</p>

<p>He could not leave her, and he could not stay. He never knew before that
he loved her. She had been a mere comrade, this girl wife of his. Ah! he
loved her now with all his heart and soul, and he knew it, only when it
was too late. Too late? Why? Then he thought of that <i>other</i> one,
binding her, linking her forever to the creature, who stood in danger of
his life. With an oath he sprang to the door, but the door would not
open,—or was it that he pressed it back,—locked it,—and flung himself
on his knees beside the bed, knowing that he dared not for his life’s
sake leave what was his all in life.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00033">III</h3>

<p>It was four in the morning when he came out of the Prison of the
Condemned with the Secretary of the American Legation. A knot of people
had gathered around the American Minister’s carriage, which stood in
front of the prison, the horses stamping and pawing in the icy street,
the coachman huddled on the box, wrapped in furs. Southwark helped the
Secretary into the carriage, and shook hands with Trent, thanking him
for coming.</p>

<p>“How the scoundrel did stare,” he said; “your evidence was worse than a
kick, but it saved his skin for the moment at least,—and prevented
complications.”</p>

<p>The Secretary sighed. “We have done our part. Now let them prove him a
spy and we wash our hands of him. Jump in, Captain! Come along, Trent!”</p>

<p>“I have a word to say to Captain Southwark, I won’t detain him,” said
Trent hastily, and dropping his voice, “Southwark, help <i>me</i> now. You
know the story from the blackguard. You know the—the child is at his
rooms. Get it, and take it to my own apartment, and if he is shot, I
will provide a home for it.”</p>

<p>“I understand,” said the Captain gravely.</p>

<p>“Will you do this at once?”</p>

<p>“At once,” he replied.</p>

<p>Their hands met in a warm clasp, and then Captain Southwark climbed into
the carriage, motioning Trent to follow; but he shook his head saying,
“Good-bye!” and the carriage rolled away.</p>

<p>He watched the carriage to the end of the street, then started toward
his own quarter, but after a step or two hesitated, stopped, and finally
turned away in the opposite direction. Something—perhaps it was the
sight of the prisoner he had so recently confronted nauseated him. He
felt the need of solitude and quiet to collect his thoughts. The events
of the evening had shaken him terribly, but he would walk it off,
forget, bury everything, and then go back to Sylvia. He started on
swiftly, and for a time the bitter thoughts seemed to fade, but when he
paused at last, breathless, under the Arc de Triomphe, the bitterness
and the wretchedness of the whole thing—yes, of his whole misspent life
came back with a pang. Then the face of the prisoner, stamped with the
horrible grimace of fear, grew in the shadows before his eyes.</p>

<p>Sick at heart he wandered up and down under the great Arc, striving to
occupy his mind, peering up at the sculptured cornices to read the names
of the heroes and battles which he knew were engraved there, but always
the ashen face of Hartman followed him, grinning with terror!—or was it
terror?—was it not triumph?—At the thought he leaped like a man who
feels a knife at his throat, but after a savage tramp around the square,
came back again and sat down to battle with his misery.</p>

<p>The air was cold, but his cheeks were burning with angry shame. Shame?
Why? Was it because he had married a girl whom chance had made a mother?
<i>Did</i> he love her? Was this miserable bohemian existence, then, his end
and aim in life? He turned his eyes upon the secrets of his heart, and
read an evil story,—the story of the past, and he covered his face for
shame, while, keeping time to the dull pain throbbing in his head, his
heart beat out the story for the future. Shame and disgrace.</p>

<p>Roused at last from a lethargy which had begun to numb the bitterness of
his thoughts, he raised his head and looked about. A sudden fog had
settled in the streets; the arches of the Arc were choked with it. He
would go home. A great horror of being alone seized him. <i>But he was not
alone.</i> The fog was peopled with phantoms. All around him in the mist
they moved, drifting through the arches in lengthening lines, and
vanished, while from the fog others rose up, swept past and were
engulfed. He was not alone, for even at his side they crowded, touched
him, swarmed before him, beside him, behind him, pressed him back,
seized, and bore him with them through the mist. Down a dim avenue,
through lanes and alleys white with fog, they moved, and if they spoke
their voices were dull as the vapour which shrouded them. At last in
front, a bank of masonry and earth cut by a massive iron barred gate
towered up in the fog. Slowly and more slowly they glided, shoulder to
shoulder and thigh to thigh. Then all movement ceased. A sudden breeze
stirred the fog. It wavered and eddied. Objects became more distinct. A
pallor crept above the horizon, touching the edges of the watery clouds,
and drew dull sparks from a thousand bayonets. Bayonets—they were
everywhere, cleaving the fog or flowing beneath it in rivers of steel.
High on the wall of masonry and earth a great gun loomed, and around it
figures moved in silhouettes. Below, a broad torrent of bayonets swept
through the iron barred gateway, out into the shadowy plain. It became
lighter. Faces grew more distinct among the marching masses and he
recognized one.</p>

<p>“You, Philippe!”</p>

<p>The figure turned its head.</p>

<p>Trent cried, “Is there room for me?” but the other only waved his arm in
a vague adieu and was gone with the rest. Presently the cavalry began to
pass, squadron on squadron, crowding out into the darkness; then many
cannon, then an ambulance, then again the endless lines of bayonets.
Beside him a cuirassier sat on his steaming horse, and in front, among a
group of mounted officers he saw a general, with the astrakan collar of
his dolman turned up about his bloodless face.</p>

<p>Some women were weeping near him and one was struggling to force a loaf
of black bread into a soldier’s haversack. The soldier tried to aid her,
but the sack was fastened, and his rifle bothered him, so Trent held it,
while the woman unbuttoned the sack and forced in the bread, now all wet
with her tears. The rifle was not heavy. Trent found it wonderfully
manageable. Was the bayonet sharp? He tried it. Then a sudden longing, a
fierce, imperative desire took possession of him.</p>

<p>“<i>Chouette!</i>” cried a gamin, clinging to the barred gate, “<i>encore toi
mon vieux</i>?”</p>

<p>Trent looked up, and the rat-killer laughed in his face. But when the
soldier had taken the rifle again, and thanking him, ran hard to catch
his battalion, he plunged into the throng about the gateway.</p>

<p>“Are you going?” he cried to a marine who sat in the gutter bandaging
his foot.</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>Then a girl—a mere child—caught him by the hand and led him into the
café which faced the gate. The room was crowded with soldiers, some,
white and silent, sitting on the floor, others groaning on the
leather-covered settees. The air was sour and suffocating.</p>

<p>“Choose!” said the girl with a little gesture of pity; “they can’t go!”</p>

<p>In a heap of clothing on the floor he found a capote and képi.</p>

<p>She helped him buckle his knapsack, cartridge-box, and belt, and showed
him how to load the chasse-pot rifle, holding it on her knees.</p>

<p>When he thanked her she started to her feet.</p>

<p>“You are a foreigner!”</p>

<p>“American,” he said, moving toward the door, but the child barred his
way.</p>

<p>“I am a Bretonne. My father is up there with the cannon of the marine.
He will shoot you if you are a spy.”</p>

<p>They faced each other for a moment. Then sighing, he bent over and
kissed the child. “Pray for France, little one,” he murmured, and she
repeated with a pale smile: “For France and you, beau Monsieur.”</p>

<p>He ran across the street and through the gateway. Once outside, he edged
into line and shouldered his way along the road. A corporal passed,
looked at him, repassed, and finally called an officer. “You belong to
the 60th,” growled the corporal looking at the number on his képi.</p>

<p>“We have no use for Franc-tireurs,” added the officer, catching sight of
his black trousers.</p>

<p>“I wish to volunteer in place of a comrade,” said Trent, and the officer
shrugged his shoulders and passed on.</p>

<p>Nobody paid much attention to him, one or two merely glancing at his
trousers. The road was deep with slush and mud-ploughed and torn by
wheels and hoofs. A soldier in front of him wrenched his foot in an icy
rut and dragged himself to the edge of the embankment groaning. The
plain on either side of them was grey with melting snow. Here and there
behind dismantled hedge-rows stood wagons, bearing white flags with red
crosses. Sometimes the driver was a priest in rusty hat and gown,
sometimes a crippled Mobile. Once they passed a wagon driven by a Sister
of Charity. Silent empty houses with great rents in their walls, and
every window blank, huddled along the road. Further on, within the zone
of danger, nothing of human habitation remained except here and there a
pile of frozen bricks or a blackened cellar choked with snow.</p>

<p>For some time Trent had been annoyed by the man behind him, who kept
treading on his heels. Convinced at last that it was intentional, he
turned to remonstrate and found himself face to face with a
fellow-student from the Beaux Arts. Trent stared.</p>

<p>“I thought you were in the hospital!”</p>

<p>The other shook his head, pointing to his bandaged jaw.</p>

<p>“I see, you can’t speak. Can I do anything?”</p>

<p>The wounded man rummaged in his haversack and produced a crust of black
bread.</p>

<p>“He can’t eat it, his jaw is smashed, and he wants you to chew it for
him,” said the soldier next to him.</p>

<p>Trent took the crust, and grinding it in his teeth morsel by morsel,
passed it back to the starving man.</p>

<p>From time to time mounted orderlies sped to the front, covering them
with slush. It was a chilly, silent march through sodden meadows
wreathed in fog. Along the railroad embankment across the ditch, another
column moved parallel to their own. Trent watched it, a sombre mass, now
distinct, now vague, now blotted out in a puff of fog. Once for
half-an-hour he lost it, but when again it came into view, he noticed a
thin line detach itself from the flank, and, bellying in the middle,
swing rapidly to the west. At the same moment a prolonged crackling
broke out in the fog in front. Other lines began to slough off from the
column, swinging east and west, and the crackling became continuous. A
battery passed at full gallop, and he drew back with his comrades to
give it way. It went into action a little to the right of his battalion,
and as the shot from the first rifled piece boomed through the mist, the
cannon from the fortifications opened with a mighty roar. An officer
galloped by shouting something which Trent did not catch, but he saw the
ranks in front suddenly part company with his own, and disappear in the
twilight. More officers rode up and stood beside him peering into the
fog. Away in front the crackling had become one prolonged crash. It was
dreary waiting. Trent chewed some bread for the man behind, who tried to
swallow it, and after a while shook his head, motioning Trent to eat the
rest himself. A corporal offered him a little brandy and he drank it,
but when he turned around to return the flask, the corporal was lying on
the ground. Alarmed, he looked at the soldier next to him, who shrugged
his shoulders and opened his mouth to speak, but something struck him
and he rolled over and over into the ditch below. At that moment the
horse of one of the officers gave a bound and backed into the battalion,
lashing out with his heels. One man was ridden down; another was kicked
in the chest and hurled through the ranks. The officer sank his spurs
into the horse and forced him to the front again, where he stood
trembling. The cannonade seemed to draw nearer. A staff-officer, riding
slowly up and down the battalion suddenly collapsed in his saddle and
clung to his horse’s mane. One of his boots dangled, crimsoned and
dripping, from the stirrup. Then out of the mist in front men came
running. The roads, the fields, the ditches were full of them, and many
of them fell. For an instant he imagined he saw horsemen riding about
like ghosts in the vapours beyond, and a man behind him cursed horribly,
declaring he too had seen them, and that they were Uhlans; but the
battalion stood inactive, and the mist fell again over the meadows.</p>

<p>The colonel sat heavily upon his horse, his bullet-shaped head buried in
the astrakan collar of his dolman, his fat legs sticking straight out in
the stirrups.</p>

<p>The buglers clustered about him with bugles poised, and behind him a
staff-officer in a pale blue jacket smoked a cigarette and chatted with
a captain of hussars. From the road in front came the sound of furious
galloping and an orderly reined up beside the colonel, who motioned him
to the rear without turning his head. Then on the left a confused murmur
arose which ended in a shout. A hussar passed like the wind, followed by
another and another, and then squadron after squadron whirled by them
into the sheeted mists. At that instant the colonel reared in his
saddle, the bugles clanged, and the whole battalion scrambled down the
embankment, over the ditch and started across the soggy meadow. Almost
at once Trent lost his cap. Something snatched it from his head, he
thought it was a tree branch. A good many of his comrades rolled over in
the slush and ice, and he imagined that they had slipped. One pitched
right across his path and he stopped to help him up, but the man
screamed when he touched him and an officer shouted, “Forward! Forward!”
so he ran on again. It was a long jog through the mist, and he was often
obliged to shift his rifle. When at last they lay panting behind the
railroad embankment, he looked about him. He had felt the need of
action, of a desperate physical struggle, of killing and crushing. He
had been seized with a desire to fling himself among masses and tear
right and left. He longed to fire, to use the thin sharp bayonet on his
chasse-pot. He had not expected this. He wished to become exhausted, to
struggle and cut until incapable of lifting his arm. Then he had
intended to go home. He heard a man say that half the battalion had gone
down in the charge, and he saw another examining a corpse under the
embankment. The body, still warm, was clothed in a strange uniform, but
even when he noticed the spiked helmet lying a few inches further away,
he did not realize what had happened.</p>

<p>The colonel sat on his horse a few feet to the left, his eyes sparkling
under the crimson képi. Trent heard him reply to an officer: “I can hold
it, but another charge, and I won’t have enough men left to sound a
bugle.”</p>

<p>“Were the Prussians here?” Trent asked of a soldier who sat wiping the
blood trickling from his hair.</p>

<p>“Yes. The hussars cleaned them out. We caught their cross fire.”</p>

<p>“We are supporting a battery on the embankment,” said another.</p>

<p>Then the battalion crawled over the embankment and moved along the lines
of twisted rails. Trent rolled up his trousers and tucked them into his
woollen socks: but they halted again, and some of the men sat down on
the dismantled railroad track. Trent looked for his wounded comrade from
the Beaux Arts. He was standing in his place, very pale. The cannonade
had become terrific. For a moment the mist lifted. He caught a glimpse
of the first battalion motionless on the railroad track in front, of
regiments on either flank, and then, as the fog settled again, the drums
beat and the music of the bugles began away on the extreme left. A
restless movement passed among the troops, the colonel threw up his arm,
the drums rolled, and the battalion moved off through the fog. They were
near the front now for the battalion was firing as it advanced.
Ambulances galloped along the base of the embankment to the rear, and
the hussars passed and repassed like phantoms. They were in the front at
last, for all about them was movement and turmoil, while from the fog,
close at hand, came cries and groans and crashing volleys. Shells fell
everywhere, bursting along the embankment, splashing them with frozen
slush. Trent was frightened. He began to dread the unknown, which lay
there crackling and flaming in obscurity. The shock of the cannon
sickened him. He could even see the fog light up with a dull orange as
the thunder shook the earth. It was near, he felt certain, for the
colonel shouted “Forward!” and the first battalion was hastening into
it. He felt its breath, he trembled, but hurried on. A fearful discharge
in front terrified him. Somewhere in the fog men were cheering, and the
colonel’s horse, streaming with blood plunged about in the smoke.</p>

<p>Another blast and shock, right in his face, almost stunned him, and he
faltered. All the men to the right were down. His head swam; the fog and
smoke stupefied him. He put out his hand for a support and caught
something. It was the wheel of a gun-carriage, and a man sprang from
behind it, aiming a blow at his head with a rammer, but stumbled back
shrieking with a bayonet through his neck, and Trent knew that he had
killed. Mechanically he stooped to pick up his rifle, but the bayonet
was still in the man, who lay, beating with red hands against the sod.
It sickened him and he leaned on the cannon. Men were fighting all
around him now, and the air was foul with smoke and sweat. Somebody
seized him from behind and another in front, but others in turn seized
them or struck them solid blows. The click! click! click! of bayonets
infuriated him, and he grasped the rammer and struck out blindly until
it was shivered to pieces.</p>

<p>A man threw his arm around his neck and bore him to the ground, but he
throttled him and raised himself on his knees. He saw a comrade seize
the cannon, and fall across it with his skull crushed in; he saw the
colonel tumble clean out of his saddle into the mud; then consciousness
fled.</p>

<p>When he came to himself, he was lying on the embankment among the
twisted rails. On every side huddled men who cried out and cursed and
fled away into the fog, and he staggered to his feet and followed them.
Once he stopped to help a comrade with a bandaged jaw, who could not
speak but clung to his arm for a time and then fell dead in the freezing
mire; and again he aided another, who groaned: “Trent, c’est
moi—Philippe,” until a sudden volley in the midst relieved him of his
charge.</p>

<p>An icy wind swept down from the heights, cutting the fog into shreds.
For an instant, with an evil leer the sun peered through the naked woods
of Vincennes, sank like a blood-clot in the battery smoke, lower, lower,
into the blood-soaked plain.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00034">IV</h3>

<p>When midnight sounded from the belfry of St. Sulpice the gates of Paris
were still choked with fragments of what had once been an army.</p>

<p>They entered with the night, a sullen horde, spattered with slime, faint
with hunger and exhaustion. There was little disorder at first, and the
throng at the gates parted silently as the troops tramped along the
freezing streets. Confusion came as the hours passed. Swiftly and more
swiftly, crowding squadron after squadron and battery on battery, horses
plunging and caissons jolting, the remnants from the front surged
through the gates, a chaos of cavalry and artillery struggling for the
right of way. Close upon them stumbled the infantry; here a skeleton of
a regiment marching with a desperate attempt at order, there a riotous
mob of Mobiles crushing their way to the streets, then a turmoil of
horsemen, cannon, troops without, officers, officers without men, then
again a line of ambulances, the wheels groaning under their heavy loads.</p>

<p>Dumb with misery the crowd looked on.</p>

<p>All through the day the ambulances had been arriving, and all day long
the ragged throng whimpered and shivered by the barriers. At noon the
crowd was increased ten-fold, filling the squares about the gates, and
swarming over the inner fortifications.</p>

<p>At four o’clock in the afternoon the German batteries suddenly wreathed
themselves in smoke, and the shells fell fast on Montparnasse. At twenty
minutes after four two projectiles struck a house in the rue de Bac, and
a moment later the first shell fell in the Latin Quarter.</p>

<p>Braith was painting in bed when West came in very much scared.</p>

<p>“I wish you would come down; our house has been knocked into a cocked
hat, and I’m afraid that some of the pillagers may take it into their
heads to pay us a visit to-night.”</p>

<p>Braith jumped out of bed and bundled himself into a garment which had
once been an overcoat.</p>

<p>“Anybody hurt?” he inquired, struggling with a sleeve full of
dilapidated lining.</p>

<p>“No. Colette is barricaded in the cellar, and the concierge ran away to
the fortifications. There will be a rough gang there if the bombardment
keeps up. You might help us—”</p>

<p>“Of course,” said Braith; but it was not until they had reached the rue
Serpente and had turned in the passage which led to West’s cellar, that
the latter cried: “Have you seen Jack Trent, to-day?”</p>

<p>“No,” replied Braith, looking troubled, “he was not at Ambulance
Headquarters.”</p>

<p>“He stayed to take care of Sylvia, I suppose.”</p>

<p>A bomb came crashing through the roof of a house at the end of the alley
and burst in the basement, showering the street with slate and plaster.
A second struck a chimney and plunged into the garden, followed by an
avalanche of bricks, and another exploded with a deafening report in the
next street.</p>

<p>They hurried along the passage to the steps which led to the cellar.
Here again Braith stopped.</p>

<p>“Don’t you think I had better run up to see if Jack and Sylvia are well
entrenched? I can get back before dark.”</p>

<p>“No. Go in and find Colette, and I’ll go.”</p>

<p>“No, no, let me go, there’s no danger.”</p>

<p>“I know it,” replied West calmly; and, dragging Braith into the alley,
pointed to the cellar steps. The iron door was barred.</p>

<p>“Colette! Colette!” he called. The door swung inward, and the girl
sprang up the stairs to meet them. At that instant, Braith, glancing
behind him, gave a startled cry, and pushing the two before him into the
cellar, jumped down after them and slammed the iron door. A few seconds
later a heavy jar from the outside shook the hinges.</p>

<p>“They are here,” muttered West, very pale.</p>

<p>“That door,” observed Colette calmly, “will hold for ever.”</p>

<p>Braith examined the low iron structure, now trembling with the blows
rained on it from without. West glanced anxiously at Colette, who
displayed no agitation, and this comforted him.</p>

<p>“I don’t believe they will spend much time here,” said Braith; “they
only rummage in cellars for spirits, I imagine.”</p>

<p>“Unless they hear that valuables are buried there.”</p>

<p>“But surely nothing is buried here?” exclaimed Braith uneasily.</p>

<p>“Unfortunately there is,” growled West. “That miserly landlord of
mine—”</p>

<p>A crash from the outside, followed by a yell, cut him short; then blow
after blow shook the doors, until there came a sharp snap, a clinking of
metal and a triangular bit of iron fell inwards, leaving a hole through
which struggled a ray of light.</p>

<p>Instantly West knelt, and shoving his revolver through the aperture
fired every cartridge. For a moment the alley resounded with the racket
of the revolver, then absolute silence followed.</p>

<p>Presently a single questioning blow fell upon the door, and a moment
later another and another, and then a sudden crack zigzagged across the
iron plate.</p>

<p>“Here,” said West, seizing Colette by the wrist, “you follow me,
Braith!” and he ran swiftly toward a circular spot of light at the
further end of the cellar. The spot of light came from a barred man-hole
above. West motioned Braith to mount on his shoulders.</p>

<p>“Push it over. You <i>must</i>!”</p>

<p>With little effort Braith lifted the barred cover, scrambled out on his
stomach, and easily raised Colette from West’s shoulders.</p>

<p>“Quick, old chap!” cried the latter.</p>

<p>Braith twisted his legs around a fence-chain and leaned down again. The
cellar was flooded with a yellow light, and the air reeked with the
stench of petroleum torches. The iron door still held, but a whole plate
of metal was gone, and now as they looked a figure came creeping
through, holding a torch.</p>

<p>“Quick!” whispered Braith. “Jump!” and West hung dangling until Colette
grasped him by the collar, and he was dragged out. Then her nerves gave
way and she wept hysterically, but West threw his arm around her and led
her across the gardens into the next street, where Braith, after
replacing the man-hole cover and piling some stone slabs from the wall
over it, rejoined them. It was almost dark. They hurried through the
street, now only lighted by burning buildings, or the swift glare of the
shells. They gave wide berth to the fires, but at a distance saw the
flitting forms of pillagers among the <i>débris</i>. Sometimes they passed a
female fury crazed with drink shrieking anathemas upon the world, or
some slouching lout whose blackened face and hands betrayed his share in
the work of destruction. At last they reached the Seine and passed the
bridge, and then Braith said: “I must go back. I am not sure of Jack and
Sylvia.” As he spoke, he made way for a crowd which came trampling
across the bridge, and along the river wall by the d’Orsay barracks. In
the midst of it West caught the measured tread of a platoon. A lantern
passed, a file of bayonets, then another lantern which glimmered on a
deathly face behind, and Colette gasped, “Hartman!” and he was gone.
They peered fearfully across the embankment, holding their breath. There
was a shuffle of feet on the quay, and the gate of the barracks slammed.
A lantern shone for a moment at the postern, the crowd pressed to the
grille, then came the clang of the volley from the stone parade.</p>

<p>One by one the petroleum torches flared up along the embankment, and now
the whole square was in motion. Down from the Champs Elysées and across
the Place de la Concorde straggled the fragments of the battle, a
company here, and a mob there. They poured in from every street followed
by women and children, and a great murmur, borne on the icy wind, swept
through the Arc de Triomphe and down the dark avenue,—“Perdus! perdus!”</p>

<p>A ragged end of a battalion was pressing past, the spectre of
annihilation. West groaned. Then a figure sprang from the shadowy ranks
and called West’s name, and when he saw it was Trent he cried out. Trent
seized him, white with terror.</p>

<p>“Sylvia?”</p>

<p>West stared speechless, but Colette moaned, “Oh, Sylvia! Sylvia!—and
they are shelling the Quarter!”</p>

<p>“Trent!” shouted Braith; but he was gone, and they could not overtake
him.</p>

<p>The bombardment ceased as Trent crossed the Boulevard St. Germain, but
the entrance to the rue de Seine was blocked by a heap of smoking
bricks. Everywhere the shells had torn great holes in the pavement. The
café was a wreck of splinters and glass, the book-store tottered, ripped
from roof to basement, and the little bakery, long since closed, bulged
outward above a mass of slate and tin.</p>

<p>He climbed over the steaming bricks and hurried into the rue de Tournon.
On the corner a fire blazed, lighting up his own street, and on the bank
wall, beneath a shattered gas lamp, a child was writing with a bit of
cinder.</p>

<p class="c" style="margin-top: 2%; margin-bottom: 2%;">“H<small>ERE</small> F<small>ELL THE</small> F<small>IRST</small> S<small>HELL</small>.”</p>

<p>The letters stared him in the face. The rat-killer finished and stepped
back to view his work, but catching sight of Trent’s bayonet, screamed
and fled, and as Trent staggered across the shattered street, from holes
and crannies in the ruins fierce women fled from their work of pillage,
cursing him.</p>

<p>At first he could not find his house, for the tears blinded him, but he
felt along the wall and reached the door. A lantern burned in the
concierge’s lodge and the old man lay dead beside it. Faint with fright
he leaned a moment on his rifle, then, snatching the lantern, sprang up
the stairs. He tried to call, but his tongue hardly moved. On the second
floor he saw plaster on the stairway, and on the third the floor was
torn and the concierge lay in a pool of blood across the landing. The
next floor was his, <i>theirs</i>. The door hung from its hinges, the walls
gaped. He crept in and sank down by the bed, and there two arms were
flung around his neck, and a tear-stained face sought his own.</p>

<p>“Sylvia!”</p>

<p>“O Jack! Jack! Jack!”</p>

<p>From the tumbled pillow beside them a child wailed.</p>

<p>“They brought it; it is mine,” she sobbed.</p>

<p>“Ours,” he whispered, with his arms around them both.</p>

<p>Then from the stairs below came Braith’s anxious voice.</p>

<p>“Trent! Is all well?”</p>

<h2 id="pgepubid00035"><a id="THE_STREET_OF_OUR_LADY_OF_THE_FIELDS"/>THE STREET OF OUR LADY OF THE FIELDS</h2>

<table style="border: none; padding: 0px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0em;">“Et tout les jours passés dans la tristesse</span></td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;"><span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Nous sont comptés comme des jours heureux!”</span></td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<h3 id="pgepubid00036">I</h3>

<p>The street is not fashionable, neither is it shabby. It is a pariah
among streets—a street without a Quarter. It is generally understood to
lie outside the pale of the aristocratic Avenue de l’Observatoire. The
students of the Montparnasse Quarter consider it swell and will have
none of it. The Latin Quarter, from the Luxembourg, its northern
frontier, sneers at its respectability and regards with disfavour the
correctly costumed students who haunt it. Few strangers go into it. At
times, however, the Latin Quarter students use it as a thoroughfare
between the rue de Rennes and the Bullier, but except for that and the
weekly afternoon visits of parents and guardians to the Convent near the
rue Vavin, the street of Our Lady of the Fields is as quiet as a Passy
boulevard. Perhaps the most respectable portion lies between the rue de
la Grande Chaumière and the rue Vavin, at least this was the conclusion
arrived at by the Reverend Joel Byram, as he rambled through it with
Hastings in charge. To Hastings the street looked pleasant in the bright
June weather, and he had begun to hope for its selection when the
Reverend Byram shied violently at the cross on the Convent opposite.</p>

<p>“Jesuits,” he muttered.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Hastings wearily, “I imagine we won’t find anything better.
You say yourself that vice is triumphant in Paris, and it seems to me
that in every street we find Jesuits or something worse.”</p>

<p>After a moment he repeated, “Or something worse, which of course I would
not notice except for your kindness in warning me.”</p>

<p>Dr. Byram sucked in his lips and looked about him. He was impressed by
the evident respectability of the surroundings. Then frowning at the
Convent he took Hastings’ arm and shuffled across the street to an iron
gateway which bore the number 201 <i>bis</i> painted in white on a blue
ground. Below this was a notice printed in English:</p>

<table style="border: none; padding: 1px; border-spacing: 0px;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left;">1.</td><td style="text-align: left;">For Porter please oppress once.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;">2.</td><td style="text-align: left;">For Servant please oppress twice.</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left;">3.</td><td style="text-align: left;">For Parlour please oppress thrice.</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>Hastings touched the electric button three times, and they were ushered
through the garden and into the parlour by a trim maid. The dining-room
door, just beyond, was open, and from the table in plain view a stout
woman hastily arose and came toward them. Hastings caught a glimpse of a
young man with a big head and several snuffy old gentlemen at breakfast,
before the door closed and the stout woman waddled into the room,
bringing with her an aroma of coffee and a black poodle.</p>

<p>“It ees a plaisir to you receive!” she cried. “Monsieur is Anglish? No?
Americain? Off course. My pension it ees for Americains surtout. Here
all spik Angleesh, c’est à dire, ze personnel; ze sairvants do spik,
plus ou moins, a little. I am happy to have you comme pensionnaires—”</p>

<p>“Madame,” began Dr. Byram, but was cut short again.</p>

<p>“Ah, yess, I know, ah! mon Dieu! you do not spik Frainch but you have
come to lairne! My husband does spik Frainch wiss ze pensionnaires. We
have at ze moment a family Americaine who learn of my husband Frainch—”</p>

<p>Here the poodle growled at Dr. Byram and was promptly cuffed by his
mistress.</p>

<p>“Veux tu!” she cried, with a slap, “veux tu! Oh! le vilain, oh! le
vilain!”</p>

<p>“Mais, madame,” said Hastings, smiling, “il n’a pas l’air très féroce.”</p>

<p>The poodle fled, and his mistress cried, “Ah, ze accent charming! He
does spik already Frainch like a Parisien young gentleman!”</p>

<p>Then Dr. Byram managed to get in a word or two and gathered more or less
information with regard to prices.</p>

<p>“It ees a pension serieux; my clientèle ees of ze best, indeed a pension
de famille where one ees at ’ome.”</p>

<p>Then they went upstairs to examine Hastings’ future quarters, test the
bed-springs and arrange for the weekly towel allowance. Dr. Byram
appeared satisfied.</p>

<p>Madame Marotte accompanied them to the door and rang for the maid, but
as Hastings stepped out into the gravel walk, his guide and mentor
paused a moment and fixed Madame with his watery eyes.</p>

<p>“You understand,” he said, “that he is a youth of most careful bringing
up, and his character and morals are without a stain. He is young and
has never been abroad, never even seen a large city, and his parents
have requested me, as an old family friend living in Paris, to see that
he is placed under good influences. He is to study art, but on no
account would his parents wish him to live in the Latin Quarter if they
knew of the immorality which is rife there.”</p>

<p>A sound like the click of a latch interrupted him and he raised his
eyes, but not in time to see the maid slap the big-headed young man
behind the parlour-door.</p>

<p>Madame coughed, cast a deadly glance behind her and then beamed on Dr.
Byram.</p>

<p>“It ees well zat he come here. The pension more serious, il n’en existe
pas, eet ees not any!” she announced with conviction.</p>

<p>So, as there was nothing more to add, Dr. Byram joined Hastings at the
gate.</p>

<p>“I trust,” he said, eyeing the Convent, “that you will make no
acquaintances among Jesuits!”</p>

<p>Hastings looked at the Convent until a pretty girl passed before the
gray façade, and then he looked at her. A young fellow with a paint-box
and canvas came swinging along, stopped before the pretty girl, said
something during a brief but vigorous handshake at which they both
laughed, and he went his way, calling back, “À demain Valentine!” as in
the same breath she cried, “À demain!”</p>

<p>“Valentine,” thought Hastings, “what a quaint name;” and he started to
follow the Reverend Joel Byram, who was shuffling towards the nearest
tramway station.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00037">II</h3>

<p>“An’ you are pleas wiz Paris, Monsieur’ Astang?” demanded Madame Marotte
the next morning as Hastings came into the breakfast-room of the
pension, rosy from his plunge in the limited bath above.</p>

<p>“I am sure I shall like it,” he replied, wondering at his own depression
of spirits.</p>

<p>The maid brought him coffee and rolls. He returned the vacant glance of
the big-headed young man and acknowledged diffidently the salutes of the
snuffy old gentlemen. He did not try to finish his coffee, and sat
crumbling a roll, unconscious of the sympathetic glances of Madame
Marotte, who had tact enough not to bother him.</p>

<p>Presently a maid entered with a tray on which were balanced two bowls of
chocolate, and the snuffy old gentlemen leered at her ankles. The maid
deposited the chocolate at a table near the window and smiled at
Hastings. Then a thin young lady, followed by her counterpart in all
except years, marched into the room and took the table near the window.
They were evidently American, but Hastings, if he expected any sign of
recognition, was disappointed. To be ignored by compatriots intensified
his depression. He fumbled with his knife and looked at his plate.</p>

<p>The thin young lady was talkative enough. She was quite aware of
Hastings’ presence, ready to be flattered if he looked at her, but on
the other hand she felt her superiority, for she had been three weeks in
Paris and he, it was easy to see, had not yet unpacked his
steamer-trunk.</p>

<p>Her conversation was complacent. She argued with her mother upon the
relative merits of the Louvre and the Bon Marché, but her mother’s part
of the discussion was mostly confined to the observation, “Why, Susie!”</p>

<p>The snuffy old gentlemen had left the room in a body, outwardly polite
and inwardly raging. They could not endure the Americans, who filled the
room with their chatter.</p>

<p>The big-headed young man looked after them with a knowing cough,
murmuring, “Gay old birds!”</p>

<p>“They look like bad old men, Mr. Bladen,” said the girl.</p>

<p>To this Mr. Bladen smiled and said, “They’ve had their day,” in a tone
which implied that he was now having his.</p>

<p>“And that’s why they all have baggy eyes,” cried the girl. “I think it’s
a shame for young gentlemen—”</p>

<p>“Why, Susie!” said the mother, and the conversation lagged.</p>

<p>After a while Mr. Bladen threw down the <i>Petit Journal</i>, which he daily
studied at the expense of the house, and turning to Hastings, started to
make himself agreeable. He began by saying, “I see you are American.”</p>

<p>To this brilliant and original opening, Hastings, deadly homesick,
replied gratefully, and the conversation was judiciously nourished by
observations from Miss Susie Byng distinctly addressed to Mr. Bladen. In
the course of events Miss Susie, forgetting to address herself
exclusively to Mr. Bladen, and Hastings replying to her general
question, the <i>entente cordiale</i> was established, and Susie and her
mother extended a protectorate over what was clearly neutral territory.</p>

<p>“Mr. Hastings, you must not desert the pension every evening as Mr.
Bladen does. Paris is an awful place for young gentlemen, and Mr. Bladen
is a horrid cynic.”</p>

<p>Mr. Bladen looked gratified.</p>

<p>Hastings answered, “I shall be at the studio all day, and I imagine I
shall be glad enough to come back at night.”</p>

<p>Mr. Bladen, who, at a salary of fifteen dollars a week, acted as agent
for the Pewly Manufacturing Company of Troy, N.Y., smiled a sceptical
smile and withdrew to keep an appointment with a customer on the
Boulevard Magenta.</p>

<p>Hastings walked into the garden with Mrs. Byng and Susie, and, at their
invitation, sat down in the shade before the iron gate.</p>

<p>The chestnut trees still bore their fragrant spikes of pink and white,
and the bees hummed among the roses, trellised on the white-walled
house.</p>

<p>A faint freshness was in the air. The watering carts moved up and down
the street, and a clear stream bubbled over the spotless gutters of the
rue de la Grande Chaumière. The sparrows were merry along the
curb-stones, taking bath after bath in the water and ruffling their
feathers with delight. In a walled garden across the street a pair of
blackbirds whistled among the almond trees.</p>

<p>Hastings swallowed the lump in his throat, for the song of the birds and
the ripple of water in a Paris gutter brought back to him the sunny
meadows of Millbrook.</p>

<p>“That’s a blackbird,” observed Miss Byng; “see him there on the bush
with pink blossoms. He’s all black except his bill, and that looks as if
it had been dipped in an omelet, as some Frenchman says—”</p>

<p>“Why, Susie!” said Mrs. Byng.</p>

<p>“That garden belongs to a studio inhabited by two Americans,” continued
the girl serenely, “and I often see them pass. They seem to need a great
many models, mostly young and feminine—”</p>

<p>“Why, Susie!”</p>

<p>“Perhaps they prefer painting that kind, but I don’t see why they should
invite five, with three more young gentlemen, and all get into two cabs
and drive away singing. This street,” she continued, “is dull. There is
nothing to see except the garden and a glimpse of the Boulevard
Montparnasse through the rue de la Grande Chaumière. No one ever passes
except a policeman. There is a convent on the corner.”</p>

<p>“I thought it was a Jesuit College,” began Hastings, but was at once
overwhelmed with a Baedecker description of the place, ending with, “On
one side stand the palatial hotels of Jean Paul Laurens and Guillaume
Bouguereau, and opposite, in the little Passage Stanislas, Carolus Duran
paints the masterpieces which charm the world.”</p>

<p>The blackbird burst into a ripple of golden throaty notes, and from some
distant green spot in the city an unknown wild-bird answered with a
frenzy of liquid trills until the sparrows paused in their ablutions to
look up with restless chirps.</p>

<p>Then a butterfly came and sat on a cluster of heliotrope and waved his
crimson-banded wings in the hot sunshine. Hastings knew him for a
friend, and before his eyes there came a vision of tall mulleins and
scented milkweed alive with painted wings, a vision of a white house and
woodbine-covered piazza,—a glimpse of a man reading and a woman leaning
over the pansy bed,—and his heart was full. He was startled a moment
later by Miss Byng.</p>

<p>“I believe you are homesick!” Hastings blushed. Miss Byng looked at him
with a sympathetic sigh and continued: “Whenever I felt homesick at
first I used to go with mamma and walk in the Luxembourg Gardens. I
don’t know why it is, but those old-fashioned gardens seemed to bring me
nearer home than anything in this artificial city.”</p>

<p>“But they are full of marble statues,” said Mrs. Byng mildly; “I don’t
see the resemblance myself.”</p>

<p>“Where is the Luxembourg?” inquired Hastings after a silence.</p>

<p>“Come with me to the gate,” said Miss Byng. He rose and followed her,
and she pointed out the rue Vavin at the foot of the street.</p>

<p>“You pass by the convent to the right,” she smiled; and Hastings went.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00038">III</h3>

<p>The Luxembourg was a blaze of flowers. He walked slowly through the long
avenues of trees, past mossy marbles and old-time columns, and threading
the grove by the bronze lion, came upon the tree-crowned terrace above
the fountain. Below lay the basin shining in the sunlight. Flowering
almonds encircled the terrace, and, in a greater spiral, groves of
chestnuts wound in and out and down among the moist thickets by the
western palace wing. At one end of the avenue of trees the Observatory
rose, its white domes piled up like an eastern mosque; at the other end
stood the heavy palace, with every window-pane ablaze in the fierce sun
of June.</p>

<p>Around the fountain, children and white-capped nurses armed with bamboo
poles were pushing toy boats, whose sails hung limp in the sunshine. A
dark policeman, wearing red epaulettes and a dress sword, watched them
for a while and then went away to remonstrate with a young man who had
unchained his dog. The dog was pleasantly occupied in rubbing grass and
dirt into his back while his legs waved into the air.</p>

<p>The policeman pointed at the dog. He was speechless with indignation.</p>

<p>“Well, Captain,” smiled the young fellow.</p>

<p>“Well, Monsieur Student,” growled the policeman.</p>

<p>“What do you come and complain to me for?”</p>

<p>“If you don’t chain him I’ll take him,” shouted the policeman.</p>

<p>“What’s that to me, mon capitaine?”</p>

<p>“Wha—t! Isn’t that bull-dog yours?”</p>

<p>“If it was, don’t you suppose I’d chain him?”</p>

<p>The officer glared for a moment in silence, then deciding that as he was
a student he was wicked, grabbed at the dog, who promptly dodged. Around
and around the flower-beds they raced, and when the officer came too
near for comfort, the bull-dog cut across a flower-bed, which perhaps
was not playing fair.</p>

<p>The young man was amused, and the dog also seemed to enjoy the exercise.</p>

<p>The policeman noticed this and decided to strike at the fountain-head of
the evil. He stormed up to the student and said, “As the owner of this
public nuisance I arrest you!”</p>

<p>“But,” objected the other, “I disclaim the dog.”</p>

<p>That was a poser. It was useless to attempt to catch the dog until three
gardeners lent a hand, but then the dog simply ran away and disappeared
in the rue de Medici.</p>

<p>The policeman shambled off to find consolation among the white-capped
nurses, and the student, looking at his watch, stood up yawning. Then
catching sight of Hastings, he smiled and bowed. Hastings walked over to
the marble, laughing.</p>

<p>“Why, Clifford,” he said, “I didn’t recognize you.”</p>

<p>“It’s my moustache,” sighed the other. “I sacrificed it to humour a whim
of—of—a friend. What do you think of my dog?”</p>

<p>“Then he is yours?” cried Hastings.</p>

<p>“Of course. It’s a pleasant change for him, this playing tag with
policemen, but he is known now and I’ll have to stop it. He’s gone home.
He always does when the gardeners take a hand. It’s a pity; he’s fond of
rolling on lawns.” Then they chatted for a moment of Hastings’
prospects, and Clifford politely offered to stand his sponsor at the
studio.</p>

<p>“You see, old tabby, I mean Dr. Byram, told me about you before I met
you,” explained Clifford, “and Elliott and I will be glad to do anything
we can.” Then looking at his watch again, he muttered, “I have just ten
minutes to catch the Versailles train; au revoir,” and started to go,
but catching sight of a girl advancing by the fountain, took off his hat
with a confused smile.</p>

<p>“Why are you not at Versailles?” she said, with an almost imperceptible
acknowledgment of Hastings’ presence.</p>

<p>“I—I’m going,” murmured Clifford.</p>

<p>For a moment they faced each other, and then Clifford, very red,
stammered, “With your permission I have the honour of presenting to you
my friend, Monsieur Hastings.”</p>

<p>Hastings bowed low. She smiled very sweetly, but there was something of
malice in the quiet inclination of her small Parisienne head.</p>

<p>“I could have wished,” she said, “that Monsieur Clifford might spare me
more time when he brings with him so charming an American.”</p>

<p>“Must—must I go, Valentine?” began Clifford.</p>

<p>“Certainly,” she replied.</p>

<p>Clifford took his leave with very bad grace, wincing, when she added,
“And give my dearest love to Cécile!” As he disappeared in the rue
d’Assas, the girl turned as if to go, but then suddenly remembering
Hastings, looked at him and shook her head.</p>

<p>“Monsieur Clifford is so perfectly harebrained,” she smiled, “it is
embarrassing sometimes. You have heard, of course, all about his success
at the Salon?”</p>

<p>He looked puzzled and she noticed it.</p>

<p>“You have been to the Salon, of course?”</p>

<p>“Why, no,” he answered, “I only arrived in Paris three days ago.”</p>

<p>She seemed to pay little heed to his explanation, but continued: “Nobody
imagined he had the energy to do anything good, but on varnishing day
the Salon was astonished by the entrance of Monsieur Clifford, who
strolled about as bland as you please with an orchid in his buttonhole,
and a beautiful picture on the line.”</p>

<p>She smiled to herself at the reminiscence, and looked at the fountain.</p>

<p>“Monsieur Bouguereau told me that Monsieur Julian was so astonished that
he only shook hands with Monsieur Clifford in a dazed manner, and
actually forgot to pat him on the back! Fancy,” she continued with much
merriment, “fancy papa Julian forgetting to pat one on the back.”</p>

<p>Hastings, wondering at her acquaintance with the great Bouguereau,
looked at her with respect. “May I ask,” he said diffidently, “whether
you are a pupil of Bouguereau?”</p>

<p>“I?” she said in some surprise. Then she looked at him curiously. Was he
permitting himself the liberty of joking on such short acquaintance?</p>

<p>His pleasant serious face questioned hers.</p>

<p>“Tiens,” she thought, “what a droll man!”</p>

<p>“You surely study art?” he said.</p>

<p>She leaned back on the crooked stick of her parasol, and looked at him.
“Why do you think so?”</p>

<p>“Because you speak as if you did.”</p>

<p>“You are making fun of me,” she said, “and it is not good taste.”</p>

<p>She stopped, confused, as he coloured to the roots of his hair.</p>

<p>“How long have you been in Paris?” she said at length.</p>

<p>“Three days,” he replied gravely.</p>

<p>“But—but—surely you are not a nouveau! You speak French too well!”</p>

<p>Then after a pause, “Really are you a nouveau?”</p>

<p>“I am,” he said.</p>

<p>She sat down on the marble bench lately occupied by Clifford, and
tilting her parasol over her small head looked at him.</p>

<p>“I don’t believe it.”</p>

<p>He felt the compliment, and for a moment hesitated to declare himself
one of the despised. Then mustering up his courage, he told her how new
and green he was, and all with a frankness which made her blue eyes open
very wide and her lips part in the sweetest of smiles.</p>

<p>“You have never seen a studio?”</p>

<p>“Never.”</p>

<p>“Nor a model?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“How funny,” she said solemnly. Then they both laughed.</p>

<p>“And you,” he said, “have seen studios?”</p>

<p>“Hundreds.”</p>

<p>“And models?”</p>

<p>“Millions.”</p>

<p>“And you know Bouguereau?”</p>

<p>“Yes, and Henner, and Constant and Laurens, and Puvis de Chavannes and
Dagnan and Courtois, and—and all the rest of them!”</p>

<p>“And yet you say you are not an artist.”</p>

<p>“Pardon,” she said gravely, “did I say I was not?”</p>

<p>“Won’t you tell me?” he hesitated.</p>

<p>At first she looked at him, shaking her head and smiling, then of a
sudden her eyes fell and she began tracing figures with her parasol in
the gravel at her feet. Hastings had taken a place on the seat, and now,
with his elbows on his knees, sat watching the spray drifting above the
fountain jet. A small boy, dressed as a sailor, stood poking his yacht
and crying, “I won’t go home! I won’t go home!” His nurse raised her
hands to Heaven.</p>

<p>“Just like a little American boy,” thought Hastings, and a pang of
homesickness shot through him.</p>

<p>Presently the nurse captured the boat, and the small boy stood at bay.</p>

<p>“Monsieur René, when you decide to come here you may have your boat.”</p>

<p>The boy backed away scowling.</p>

<p>“Give me my boat, I say,” he cried, “and don’t call me René, for my
name’s Randall and you know it!”</p>

<p>“Hello!” said Hastings,—“Randall?—that’s English.”</p>

<p>“I am American,” announced the boy in perfectly good English, turning to
look at Hastings, “and she’s such a fool she calls me René because mamma
calls me Ranny—”</p>

<p>Here he dodged the exasperated nurse and took up his station behind
Hastings, who laughed, and catching him around the waist lifted him into
his lap.</p>

<p>“One of my countrymen,” he said to the girl beside him. He smiled while
he spoke, but there was a queer feeling in his throat.</p>

<p>“Don’t you see the stars and stripes on my yacht?” demanded Randall.
Sure enough, the American colours hung limply under the nurse’s arm.</p>

<p>“Oh,” cried the girl, “he is charming,” and impulsively stooped to kiss
him, but the infant Randall wriggled out of Hastings’ arms, and his
nurse pounced upon him with an angry glance at the girl.</p>

<p>She reddened and then bit her lips as the nurse, with eyes still fixed
on her, dragged the child away and ostentatiously wiped his lips with
her handkerchief.</p>

<p>Then she stole a look at Hastings and bit her lip again.</p>

<p>“What an ill-tempered woman!” he said. “In America, most nurses are
flattered when people kiss their children.”</p>

<p>For an instant she tipped the parasol to hide her face, then closed it
with a snap and looked at him defiantly.</p>

<p>“Do you think it strange that she objected?”</p>

<p>“Why not?” he said in surprise.</p>

<p>Again she looked at him with quick searching eyes.</p>

<p>His eyes were clear and bright, and he smiled back, repeating, “Why
not?”</p>

<p>“You <i>are</i> droll,” she murmured, bending her head.</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>But she made no answer, and sat silent, tracing curves and circles in
the dust with her parasol. After a while he said—“I am glad to see that
young people have so much liberty here. I understood that the French
were not at all like us. You know in America—or at least where I live
in Milbrook, girls have every liberty,—go out alone and receive their
friends alone, and I was afraid I should miss it here. But I see how it
is now, and I am glad I was mistaken.”</p>

<p>She raised her eyes to his and kept them there.</p>

<p>He continued pleasantly—“Since I have sat here I have seen a lot of
pretty girls walking alone on the terrace there,—and then <i>you</i> are
alone too. Tell me, for I do not know French customs,—do you have the
liberty of going to the theatre without a chaperone?”</p>

<p>For a long time she studied his face, and then with a trembling smile
said, “Why do you ask me?”</p>

<p>“Because you must know, of course,” he said gaily.</p>

<p>“Yes,” she replied indifferently, “I know.”</p>

<p>He waited for an answer, but getting none, decided that perhaps she had
misunderstood him.</p>

<p>“I hope you don’t think I mean to presume on our short acquaintance,” he
began,—“in fact it is very odd but I don’t know your name. When Mr.
Clifford presented me he only mentioned mine. Is that the custom in
France?”</p>

<p>“It is the custom in the Latin Quarter,” she said with a queer light in
her eyes. Then suddenly she began talking almost feverishly.</p>

<p>“You must know, Monsieur Hastings, that we are all <i>un peu sans gêne</i>
here in the Latin Quarter. We are very Bohemian, and etiquette and
ceremony are out of place. It was for that Monsieur Clifford presented
you to me with small ceremony, and left us together with less,—only for
that, and I am his friend, and I have many friends in the Latin Quarter,
and we all know each other very well—and I am not studying art,
but—but—”</p>

<p>“But what?” he said, bewildered.</p>

<p>“I shall not tell you,—it is a secret,” she said with an uncertain
smile. On both cheeks a pink spot was burning, and her eyes were very
bright.</p>

<p>Then in a moment her face fell. “Do you know Monsieur Clifford very
intimately?”</p>

<p>“Not very.”</p>

<p>After a while she turned to him, grave and a little pale.</p>

<p>“My name is Valentine—Valentine Tissot. Might—might I ask a service of
you on such very short acquaintance?”</p>

<p>“Oh,” he cried, “I should be honoured.”</p>

<p>“It is only this,” she said gently, “it is not much. Promise me not to
speak to Monsieur Clifford about me. Promise me that you will speak to
no one about me.”</p>

<p>“I promise,” he said, greatly puzzled.</p>

<p>She laughed nervously. “I wish to remain a mystery. It is a caprice.”</p>

<p>“But,” he began, “I had wished, I had hoped that you might give Monsieur
Clifford permission to bring me, to present me at your house.”</p>

<p>“My—my house!” she repeated.</p>

<p>“I mean, where you live, in fact, to present me to your family.”</p>

<p>The change in the girl’s face shocked him.</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon,” he cried, “I have hurt you.”</p>

<p>And as quick as a flash she understood him because she was a woman.</p>

<p>“My parents are dead,” she said.</p>

<p>Presently he began again, very gently.</p>

<p>“Would it displease you if I beg you to receive me? It is the custom?”</p>

<p>“I cannot,” she answered. Then glancing up at him, “I am sorry; I should
like to; but believe me. I cannot.”</p>

<p>He bowed seriously and looked vaguely uneasy.</p>

<p>“It isn’t because I don’t wish to. I—I like you; you are very kind to
me.”</p>

<p>“Kind?” he cried, surprised and puzzled.</p>

<p>“I like you,” she said slowly, “and we will see each other sometimes if
you will.”</p>

<p>“At friends’ houses.”</p>

<p>“No, not at friends’ houses.”</p>

<p>“Where?”</p>

<p>“Here,” she said with defiant eyes.</p>

<p>“Why,” he cried, “in Paris you are much more liberal in your views than
we are.”</p>

<p>She looked at him curiously.</p>

<p>“Yes, we are very Bohemian.”</p>

<p>“I think it is charming,” he declared.</p>

<p>“You see, we shall be in the best of society,” she ventured timidly,
with a pretty gesture toward the statues of the dead queens, ranged in
stately ranks above the terrace.</p>

<p>He looked at her, delighted, and she brightened at the success of her
innocent little pleasantry.</p>

<p>“Indeed,” she smiled, “I shall be well chaperoned, because you see we
are under the protection of the gods themselves; look, there are Apollo,
and Juno, and Venus, on their pedestals,” counting them on her small
gloved fingers, “and Ceres, Hercules, and—but I can’t make out—”</p>

<p>Hastings turned to look up at the winged god under whose shadow they
were seated.</p>

<p>“Why, it’s Love,” he said.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00039">IV</h3>

<p>“There is a nouveau here,” drawled Laffat, leaning around his easel and
addressing his friend Bowles, “there is a nouveau here who is so tender
and green and appetizing that Heaven help him if he should fall into a
salad bowl.”</p>

<p>“Hayseed?” inquired Bowles, plastering in a background with a broken
palette-knife and squinting at the effect with approval.</p>

<p>“Yes, Squeedunk or Oshkosh, and how he ever grew up among the daisies
and escaped the cows, Heaven alone knows!”</p>

<p>Bowles rubbed his thumb across the outlines of his study to “throw in a
little atmosphere,” as he said, glared at the model, pulled at his pipe
and finding it out struck a match on his neighbour’s back to relight it.</p>

<p>“His name,” continued Laffat, hurling a bit of bread at the hat-rack,
“his name is Hastings. He <i>is</i> a berry. He knows no more about the
world,”—and here Mr. Laffat’s face spoke volumes for his own knowledge
of that planet,—“than a maiden cat on its first moonlight stroll.”</p>

<p>Bowles now having succeeded in lighting his pipe, repeated the thumb
touch on the other edge of the study and said, “Ah!”</p>

<p>“Yes,” continued his friend, “and would you imagine it, he seems to
think that everything here goes on as it does in his d——d little
backwoods ranch at home; talks about the pretty girls who walk alone in
the street; says how sensible it is; and how French parents are
misrepresented in America; says that for his part he finds French
girls,—and he confessed to only knowing one,—as jolly as American
girls. I tried to set him right, tried to give him a pointer as to what
sort of ladies walk about alone or with students, and he was either too
stupid or too innocent to catch on. Then I gave it to him straight, and
he said I was a vile-minded fool and marched off.”</p>

<p>“Did you assist him with your shoe?” inquired Bowles, languidly
interested.</p>

<p>“Well, no.”</p>

<p>“He called you a vile-minded fool.”</p>

<p>“He was correct,” said Clifford from his easel in front.</p>

<p>“What—what do you mean?” demanded Laffat, turning red.</p>

<p>“<i>That</i>,” replied Clifford.</p>

<p>“Who spoke to you? Is this your business?” sneered Bowles, but nearly
lost his balance as Clifford swung about and eyed him.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said slowly, “it’s my business.”</p>

<p>No one spoke for some time.</p>

<p>Then Clifford sang out, “I say, Hastings!”</p>

<p>And when Hastings left his easel and came around, he nodded toward the
astonished Laffat.</p>

<p>“This man has been disagreeable to you, and I want to tell you that any
time you feel inclined to kick him, why, I will hold the other
creature.”</p>

<p>Hastings, embarrassed, said, “Why no, I don’t agree with his ideas,
nothing more.”</p>

<p>Clifford said “Naturally,” and slipping his arm through Hastings’,
strolled about with him, and introduced him to several of his own
friends, at which all the nouveaux opened their eyes with envy, and the
studio were given to understand that Hastings, although prepared to do
menial work as the latest nouveau, was already within the charmed circle
of the old, respected and feared, the truly great.</p>

<p>The rest finished, the model resumed his place, and work went on in a
chorus of songs and yells and every ear-splitting noise which the art
student utters when studying the beautiful.</p>

<p>Five o’clock struck,—the model yawned, stretched and climbed into his
trousers, and the noisy contents of six studios crowded through the hall
and down into the street. Ten minutes later, Hastings found himself on
top of a Montrouge tram, and shortly afterward was joined by Clifford.</p>

<p>They climbed down at the rue Gay Lussac.</p>

<p>“I always stop here,” observed Clifford, “I like the walk through the
Luxembourg.”</p>

<p>“By the way,” said Hastings, “how can I call on you when I don’t know
where you live?”</p>

<p>“Why, I live opposite you.”</p>

<p>“What—the studio in the garden where the almond trees are and the
blackbirds—”</p>

<p>“Exactly,” said Clifford. “I’m with my friend Elliott.”</p>

<p>Hastings thought of the description of the two American artists which he
had heard from Miss Susie Byng, and looked blank.</p>

<p>Clifford continued, “Perhaps you had better let me know when you think
of coming so,—so that I will be sure to—to be there,” he ended rather
lamely.</p>

<p>“I shouldn’t care to meet any of your model friends there,” said
Hastings, smiling. “You know—my ideas are rather straitlaced,—I
suppose you would say, Puritanical. I shouldn’t enjoy it and wouldn’t
know how to behave.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I understand,” said Clifford, but added with great
cordiality,—“I’m sure we’ll be friends although you may not approve of
me and my set, but you will like Severn and Selby because—because,
well, they are like yourself, old chap.”</p>

<p>After a moment he continued, “There is something I want to speak about.
You see, when I introduced you, last week, in the Luxembourg, to
Valentine—”</p>

<p>“Not a word!” cried Hastings, smiling; “you must not tell me a word of
her!”</p>

<p>“Why—”</p>

<p>“No—not a word!” he said gaily. “I insist,—promise me upon your honour
you will not speak of her until I give you permission; promise!”</p>

<p>“I promise,” said Clifford, amazed.</p>

<p>“She is a charming girl,—we had such a delightful chat after you left,
and I thank you for presenting me, but not another word about her until
I give you permission.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” murmured Clifford.</p>

<p>“Remember your promise,” he smiled, as he turned into his gateway.</p>

<p>Clifford strolled across the street and, traversing the ivy-covered
alley, entered his garden.</p>

<p>He felt for his studio key, muttering, “I wonder—I wonder,—but of
course he doesn’t!”</p>

<p>He entered the hallway, and fitting the key into the door, stood staring
at the two cards tacked over the panels.</p>

<table style="min-width: 16em;">
<tbody><tr><td style="text-align: center; border: 2px solid; padding: 5% 2%;">FOXHALL CLIFFORD</td></tr>
<tr><td> </td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: center; border: 2px solid; padding: 5% 2%;">RICHARD OSBORNE ELLIOTT</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>“Why the devil doesn’t he want me to speak of her?”</p>

<p>He opened the door, and, discouraging the caresses of two brindle
bull-dogs, sank down on the sofa.</p>

<p>Elliott sat smoking and sketching with a piece of charcoal by the
window.</p>

<p>“Hello,” he said without looking around.</p>

<p>Clifford gazed absently at the back of his head, murmuring, “I’m afraid,
I’m afraid that man is too innocent. I say, Elliott,” he said, at last,
“Hastings,—you know the chap that old Tabby Byram came around here to
tell us about—the day you had to hide Colette in the armoire—”</p>

<p>“Yes, what’s up?”</p>

<p>“Oh, nothing. He’s a brick.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Elliott, without enthusiasm.</p>

<p>“Don’t you think so?” demanded Clifford.</p>

<p>“Why yes, but he is going to have a tough time when some of his
illusions are dispelled.”</p>

<p>“More shame to those who dispel ’em!”</p>

<p>“Yes,—wait until he comes to pay his call on us, unexpectedly, of
course—”</p>

<p>Clifford looked virtuous and lighted a cigar.</p>

<p>“I was just going to say,” he observed, “that I have asked him not to
come without letting us know, so I can postpone any orgie you may have
intended—”</p>

<p>“Ah!” cried Elliott indignantly, “I suppose you put it to him in that
way.”</p>

<p>“Not exactly,” grinned Clifford. Then more seriously, “I don’t want
anything to occur here to bother him. He’s a brick, and it’s a pity we
can’t be more like him.”</p>

<p>“I am,” observed Elliott complacently, “only living with you—”</p>

<p>“Listen!” cried the other. “I have managed to put my foot in it in great
style. Do you know what I’ve done? Well—the first time I met him in the
street,—or rather, it was in the Luxembourg, I introduced him to
Valentine!”</p>

<p>“Did he object?”</p>

<p>“Believe me,” said Clifford, solemnly, “this rustic Hastings has no more
idea that Valentine is—is—in fact is Valentine, than he has that he
himself is a beautiful example of moral decency in a Quarter where
morals are as rare as elephants. I heard enough in a conversation
between that blackguard Loffat and the little immoral eruption, Bowles,
to open my eyes. I tell you Hastings is a trump! He’s a healthy,
clean-minded young fellow, bred in a small country village, brought up
with the idea that saloons are way-stations to hell—and as for women—”</p>

<p>“Well?” demanded Elliott.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Clifford, “his idea of the dangerous woman is probably a
painted Jezabel.”</p>

<p>“Probably,” replied the other.</p>

<p>“He’s a trump!” said Clifford, “and if he swears the world is as good
and pure as his own heart, I’ll swear he’s right.”</p>

<p>Elliott rubbed his charcoal on his file to get a point and turned to his
sketch saying, “He will never hear any pessimism from Richard Osborne
E.”</p>

<p>“He’s a lesson to me,” said Clifford. Then he unfolded a small perfumed
note, written on rose-coloured paper, which had been lying on the table
before him.</p>

<p>He read it, smiled, whistled a bar or two from “Miss Helyett,” and sat
down to answer it on his best cream-laid note-paper. When it was written
and sealed, he picked up his stick and marched up and down the studio
two or three times, whistling.</p>

<p>“Going out?” inquired the other, without turning.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said, but lingered a moment over Elliott’s shoulder, watching
him pick out the lights in his sketch with a bit of bread.</p>

<p>“To-morrow is Sunday,” he observed after a moment’s silence.</p>

<p>“Well?” inquired Elliott.</p>

<p>“Have you seen Colette?”</p>

<p>“No, I will to-night. She and Rowden and Jacqueline are coming to
Boulant’s. I suppose you and Cécile will be there?”</p>

<p>“Well, no,” replied Clifford. “Cécile dines at home to-night, and I—I
had an idea of going to Mignon’s.”</p>

<p>Elliott looked at him with disapproval.</p>

<p>“You can make all the arrangements for La Roche without me,” he
continued, avoiding Elliott’s eyes.</p>

<p>“What are you up to now?”</p>

<p>“Nothing,” protested Clifford.</p>

<p>“Don’t tell me,” replied his chum, with scorn; “fellows don’t rush off
to Mignon’s when the set dine at Boulant’s. Who is it now?—but no, I
won’t ask that,—what’s the use!” Then he lifted up his voice in
complaint and beat upon the table with his pipe. “What’s the use of ever
trying to keep track of you? What will Cécile say,—oh, yes, what will
she say? It’s a pity you can’t be constant two months, yes, by Jove! and
the Quarter is indulgent, but you abuse its good nature and mine too!”</p>

<p>Presently he arose, and jamming his hat on his head, marched to the
door.</p>

<p>“Heaven alone knows why any one puts up with your antics, but they all
do and so do I. If I were Cécile or any of the other pretty fools after
whom you have toddled and will, in all human probabilities, continue to
toddle, I say, if I were Cécile I’d spank you! Now I’m going to
Boulant’s, and as usual I shall make excuses for you and arrange the
affair, and I don’t care a continental where you are going, but, by the
skull of the studio skeleton! if you don’t turn up to-morrow with your
sketching-kit under one arm and Cécile under the other,—if you don’t
turn up in good shape, I’m done with you, and the rest can think what
they please. Good-night.”</p>

<p>Clifford said good-night with as pleasant a smile as he could muster,
and then sat down with his eyes on the door. He took out his watch and
gave Elliott ten minutes to vanish, then rang the concierge’s call,
murmuring, “Oh dear, oh dear, why the devil do I do it?”</p>

<p>“Alfred,” he said, as that gimlet-eyed person answered the call, “make
yourself clean and proper, Alfred, and replace your sabots with a pair
of shoes. Then put on your best hat and take this letter to the big
white house in the Rue de Dragon. There is no answer, <i>mon petit</i>
Alfred.”</p>

<p>The concierge departed with a snort in which unwillingness for the
errand and affection for M. Clifford were blended. Then with great care
the young fellow arrayed himself in all the beauties of his and
Elliott’s wardrobe. He took his time about it, and occasionally
interrupted his toilet to play his banjo or make pleasing diversion for
the bull-dogs by gambling about on all fours. “I’ve got two hours before
me,” he thought, and borrowed a pair of Elliott’s silken foot-gear, with
which he and the dogs played ball until he decided to put them on. Then
he lighted a cigarette and inspected his dress-coat. When he had emptied
it of four handkerchiefs, a fan, and a pair of crumpled gloves as long
as his arm, he decided it was not suited to add <i>éclat</i> to his charms
and cast about in his mind for a substitute. Elliott was too thin, and,
anyway, his coats were now under lock and key. Rowden probably was as
badly off as himself. Hastings! Hastings was the man! But when he threw
on a smoking-jacket and sauntered over to Hastings’ house, he was
informed that he had been gone over an hour.</p>

<p>“Now, where in the name of all that’s reasonable could he have gone!”
muttered Clifford, looking down the street.</p>

<p>The maid didn’t know, so he bestowed upon her a fascinating smile and
lounged back to the studio.</p>

<p>Hastings was not far away. The Luxembourg is within five minutes’ walk
of the rue Notre Dame des Champs, and there he sat under the shadow of a
winged god, and there he had sat for an hour, poking holes in the dust
and watching the steps which lead from the northern terrace to the
fountain. The sun hung, a purple globe, above the misty hills of Meudon.
Long streamers of clouds touched with rose swept low on the western sky,
and the dome of the distant Invalides burned like an opal through the
haze. Behind the Palace the smoke from a high chimney mounted straight
into the air, purple until it crossed the sun, where it changed to a bar
of smouldering fire. High above the darkening foliage of the chestnuts
the twin towers of St. Sulpice rose, an ever-deepening silhouette.</p>

<p>A sleepy blackbird was carolling in some near thicket, and pigeons
passed and repassed with the whisper of soft winds in their wings. The
light on the Palace windows had died away, and the dome of the Pantheon
swam aglow above the northern terrace, a fiery Valhalla in the sky;
while below in grim array, along the terrace ranged, the marble ranks of
queens looked out into the west.</p>

<p>From the end of the long walk by the northern façade of the Palace came
the noise of omnibuses and the cries of the street. Hastings looked at
the Palace clock. Six, and as his own watch agreed with it, he fell to
poking holes in the gravel again. A constant stream of people passed
between the Odéon and the fountain. Priests in black, with
silver-buckled shoes; line soldiers, slouchy and rakish; neat girls
without hats bearing milliners’ boxes, students with black portfolios
and high hats, students with bérets and big canes, nervous,
quick-stepping officers, symphonies in turquoise and silver; ponderous
jangling cavalrymen all over dust, pastry cooks’ boys skipping along
with utter disregard for the safety of the basket balanced on the impish
head, and then the lean outcast, the shambling Paris tramp, slouching
with shoulders bent and little eye furtively scanning the ground for
smokers’ refuse;—all these moved in a steady stream across the fountain
circle and out into the city by the Odeon, whose long arcades were now
beginning to flicker with gas-jets. The melancholy bells of St Sulpice
struck the hour and the clock-tower of the Palace lighted up. Then
hurried steps sounded across the gravel and Hastings raised his head.</p>

<p>“How late you are,” he said, but his voice was hoarse and only his
flushed face told how long had seemed the waiting.</p>

<p>She said, “I was kept—indeed, I was so much annoyed—and—and I may
only stay a moment.”</p>

<p>She sat down beside him, casting a furtive glance over her shoulder at
the god upon his pedestal.</p>

<p>“What a nuisance, that intruding cupid still there?”</p>

<p>“Wings and arrows too,” said Hastings, unheeding her motion to be
seated.</p>

<p>“Wings,” she murmured, “oh, yes—to fly away with when he’s tired of his
play. Of course it was a man who conceived the idea of wings, otherwise
Cupid would have been insupportable.”</p>

<p>“Do you think so?”</p>

<p>“<i>Ma foi</i>, it’s what men think.”</p>

<p>“And women?”</p>

<p>“Oh,” she said, with a toss of her small head, “I really forget what we
were speaking of.”</p>

<p>“We were speaking of love,” said Hastings.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> was not,” said the girl. Then looking up at the marble god, “I
don’t care for this one at all. I don’t believe he knows how to shoot
his arrows—no, indeed, he is a coward;—he creeps up like an assassin
in the twilight. I don’t approve of cowardice,” she announced, and
turned her back on the statue.</p>

<p>“I think,” said Hastings quietly, “that he does shoot fairly—yes, and
even gives one warning.”</p>

<p>“Is it your experience, Monsieur Hastings?”</p>

<p>He looked straight into her eyes and said, “He is warning me.”</p>

<p>“Heed the warning then,” she cried, with a nervous laugh. As she spoke
she stripped off her gloves, and then carefully proceeded to draw them
on again. When this was accomplished she glanced at the Palace clock,
saying, “Oh dear, how late it is!” furled her umbrella, then unfurled
it, and finally looked at him.</p>

<p>“No,” he said, “I shall not heed his warning.”</p>

<p>“Oh dear,” she sighed again, “still talking about that tiresome statue!”
Then stealing a glance at his face, “I suppose—I suppose you are in
love.”</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” he muttered, “I suppose I am.”</p>

<p>She raised her head with a quick gesture. “You seem delighted at the
idea,” she said, but bit her lip and trembled as his eyes met hers. Then
sudden fear came over her and she sprang up, staring into the gathering
shadows.</p>

<p>“Are you cold?” he said.</p>

<p>But she only answered, “Oh dear, oh dear, it is late—so late! I must
go—good-night.”</p>

<p>She gave him her gloved hand a moment and then withdrew it with a start.</p>

<p>“What is it?” he insisted. “Are you frightened?”</p>

<p>She looked at him strangely.</p>

<p>“No—no—not frightened,—you are very good to me—”</p>

<p>“By Jove!” he burst out, “what do you mean by saying I’m good to you?
That’s at least the third time, and I don’t understand!”</p>

<p>The sound of a drum from the guard-house at the palace cut him short.
“Listen,” she whispered, “they are going to close. It’s late, oh, so
late!”</p>

<p>The rolling of the drum came nearer and nearer, and then the silhouette
of the drummer cut the sky above the eastern terrace. The fading light
lingered a moment on his belt and bayonet, then he passed into the
shadows, drumming the echoes awake. The roll became fainter along the
eastern terrace, then grew and grew and rattled with increasing
sharpness when he passed the avenue by the bronze lion and turned down
the western terrace walk. Louder and louder the drum sounded, and the
echoes struck back the notes from the grey palace wall; and now the
drummer loomed up before them—his red trousers a dull spot in the
gathering gloom, the brass of his drum and bayonet touched with a pale
spark, his epaulettes tossing on his shoulders. He passed leaving the
crash of the drum in their ears, and far into the alley of trees they
saw his little tin cup shining on his haversack. Then the sentinels
began the monotonous cry: “On ferme! on ferme!” and the bugle blew from
the barracks in the rue de Tournon.</p>

<p>“On ferme! on ferme!”</p>

<p>“Good-night,” she whispered, “I must return alone to-night.”</p>

<p>He watched her until she reached the northern terrace, and then sat down
on the marble seat until a hand on his shoulder and a glimmer of
bayonets warned him away.</p>

<p>She passed on through the grove, and turning into the rue de Medici,
traversed it to the Boulevard. At the corner she bought a bunch of
violets and walked on along the Boulevard to the rue des Écoles. A cab
was drawn up before Boulant’s, and a pretty girl aided by Elliott jumped
out.</p>

<p>“Valentine!” cried the girl, “come with us!”</p>

<p>“I can’t,” she said, stopping a moment—“I have a rendezvous at
Mignon’s.”</p>

<p>“Not Victor?” cried the girl, laughing, but she passed with a little
shiver, nodding good-night, then turning into the Boulevard St. Germain,
she walked a tittle faster to escape a gay party sitting before the Café
Cluny who called to her to join them. At the door of the Restaurant
Mignon stood a coal-black negro in buttons. He took off his peaked cap
as she mounted the carpeted stairs.</p>

<p>“Send Eugene to me,” she said at the office, and passing through the
hallway to the right of the dining-room stopped before a row of panelled
doors. A waiter passed and she repeated her demand for Eugene, who
presently appeared, noiselessly skipping, and bowed murmuring, “Madame.”</p>

<p>“Who is here?”</p>

<p>“No one in the cabinets, madame; in the half Madame Madelon and Monsieur
Gay, Monsieur de Clamart, Monsieur Clisson, Madame Marie and their set.”
Then he looked around and bowing again murmured, “Monsieur awaits madame
since half an hour,” and he knocked at one of the panelled doors bearing
the number six.</p>

<p>Clifford opened the door and the girl entered.</p>

<p>The garçon bowed her in, and whispering, “Will Monsieur have the
goodness to ring?” vanished.</p>

<p>He helped her off with her jacket and took her hat and umbrella. When
she was seated at the little table with Clifford opposite she smiled and
leaned forward on both elbows looking him in the face.</p>

<p>“What are you doing here?” she demanded.</p>

<p>“Waiting,” he replied, in accents of adoration.</p>

<p>For an instant she turned and examined herself in the glass. The wide
blue eyes, the curling hair, the straight nose and short curled lip
flashed in the mirror an instant only, and then its depths reflected her
pretty neck and back. “Thus do I turn my back on vanity,” she said, and
then leaning forward again, “What are you doing here?”</p>

<p>“Waiting for you,” repeated Clifford, slightly troubled.</p>

<p>“And Cécile.”</p>

<p>“Now don’t, Valentine—”</p>

<p>“Do you know,” she said calmly, “I dislike your conduct?”</p>

<p>He was a little disconcerted, and rang for Eugene to cover his
confusion.</p>

<p>The soup was bisque, and the wine Pommery, and the courses followed each
other with the usual regularity until Eugene brought coffee, and there
was nothing left on the table but a small silver lamp.</p>

<p>“Valentine,” said Clifford, after having obtained permission to smoke,
“is it the Vaudeville or the Eldorado—or both, or the Nouveau Cirque,
or—”</p>

<p>“It is here,” said Valentine.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said, greatly flattered, “I’m afraid I couldn’t amuse you—”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, you are funnier than the Eldorado.”</p>

<p>“Now see here, don’t guy me, Valentine. You always do, and, and,—you
know what they say,—a good laugh kills—”</p>

<p>“What?”</p>

<p>“Er—er—love and all that.”</p>

<p>She laughed until her eyes were moist with tears. “Tiens,” she cried,
“he is dead, then!”</p>

<p>Clifford eyed her with growing alarm.</p>

<p>“Do you know why I came?” she said.</p>

<p>“No,” he replied uneasily, “I don’t.”</p>

<p>“How long have you made love to me?”</p>

<p>“Well,” he admitted, somewhat startled,—“I should say,—for about a
year.”</p>

<p>“It is a year, I think. Are you not tired?”</p>

<p>He did not answer.</p>

<p>“Don’t you know that I like you too well to—to ever fall in love with
you?” she said. “Don’t you know that we are too good comrades,—too old
friends for that? And were we not,—do you think that I do not know your
history, Monsieur Clifford?”</p>

<p>“Don’t be—don’t be so sarcastic,” he urged; “don’t be unkind,
Valentine.”</p>

<p>“I’m not. I’m kind. I’m very kind,—to you and to Cécile.”</p>

<p>“Cécile is tired of me.”</p>

<p>“I hope she is,” said the girl, “for she deserves a better fate. Tiens,
do you know your reputation in the Quarter? Of the inconstant, the most
inconstant,—utterly incorrigible and no more serious than a gnat on a
summer night. Poor Cécile!”</p>

<p>Clifford looked so uncomfortable that she spoke more kindly.</p>

<p>“I like you. You know that. Everybody does. You are a spoiled child
here. Everything is permitted you and every one makes allowance, but
every one cannot be a victim to caprice.”</p>

<p>“Caprice!” he cried. “By Jove, if the girls of the Latin Quarter are not
capricious—”</p>

<p>“Never mind,—never mind about that! You must not sit in judgment—you
of all men. Why are you here to-night? Oh,” she cried, “I will tell you
why! Monsieur receives a little note; he sends a little answer; he
dresses in his conquering raiment—”</p>

<p>“I don’t,” said Clifford, very red.</p>

<p>“You do, and it becomes you,” she retorted with a faint smile. Then
again, very quietly, “I am in your power, but I know I am in the power
of a friend. I have come to acknowledge it to you here,—and it is
because of that that I am here to beg of you—a—a favour.”</p>

<p>Clifford opened his eyes, but said nothing.</p>

<p>“I am in—great distress of mind. It is Monsieur Hastings.”</p>

<p>“Well?” said Clifford, in some astonishment.</p>

<p>“I want to ask you,” she continued in a low voice, “I want to ask you
to—to—in case you should speak of me before him,—not to say,—not to
say,—”</p>

<p>“I shall not speak of you to him,” he said quietly.</p>

<p>“Can—can you prevent others?”</p>

<p>“I might if I was present. May I ask why?”</p>

<p>“That is not fair,” she murmured; “you know how—how he considers
me,—as he considers every woman. You know how different he is from you
and the rest. I have never seen a man,—such a man as Monsieur
Hastings.”</p>

<p>He let his cigarette go out unnoticed.</p>

<p>“I am almost afraid of him—afraid he should know—what we all are in
the Quarter. Oh, I do not wish him to know! I do not wish him to—to
turn from me—to cease from speaking to me as he does! You—you and the
rest cannot know what it has been to me. I could not believe him,—I
could not believe he was so good and—and noble. I do not wish him to
know—so soon. He will find out—sooner or later, he will find out for
himself, and then he will turn away from me. Why!” she cried
passionately, “why should he turn from me and not from <i>you</i>?”</p>

<p>Clifford, much embarrassed, eyed his cigarette.</p>

<p>The girl rose, very white. “He is your friend—you have a right to warn
him.”</p>

<p>“He is my friend,” he said at length.</p>

<p>They looked at each other in silence.</p>

<p>Then she cried, “By all that I hold to me most sacred, you need not warn
him!”</p>

<p>“I shall trust your word,” he said pleasantly.</p>

<h3 id="pgepubid00040">V</h3>

<p>The month passed quickly for Hastings, and left few definite impressions
after it. It did leave some, however. One was a painful impression of
meeting Mr. Bladen on the Boulevard des Capucines in company with a very
pronounced young person whose laugh dismayed him, and when at last he
escaped from the café where Mr. Bladen had hauled him to join them in a
<i>bock</i> he felt as if the whole boulevard was looking at him, and judging
him by his company. Later, an instinctive conviction regarding the young
person with Mr. Bladen sent the hot blood into his cheek, and he
returned to the pension in such a miserable state of mind that Miss Byng
was alarmed and advised him to conquer his homesickness at once.</p>

<p>Another impression was equally vivid. One Saturday morning, feeling
lonely, his wanderings about the city brought him to the Gare St.
Lazare. It was early for breakfast, but he entered the Hôtel Terminus
and took a table near the window. As he wheeled about to give his order,
a man passing rapidly along the aisle collided with his head, and
looking up to receive the expected apology, he was met instead by a slap
on the shoulder and a hearty, “What the deuce are you doing here, old
chap?” It was Rowden, who seized him and told him to come along. So,
mildly protesting, he was ushered into a private dining-room where
Clifford, rather red, jumped up from the table and welcomed him with a
startled air which was softened by the unaffected glee of Rowden and the
extreme courtesy of Elliott. The latter presented him to three
bewitching girls who welcomed him so charmingly and seconded Rowden in
his demand that Hastings should make one of the party, that he consented
at once. While Elliott briefly outlined the projected excursion to La
Roche, Hastings delightedly ate his omelet, and returned the smiles of
encouragement from Cécile and Colette and Jacqueline. Meantime Clifford
in a bland whisper was telling Rowden what an ass he was. Poor Rowden
looked miserable until Elliott, divining how affairs were turning,
frowned on Clifford and found a moment to let Rowden know that they were
all going to make the best of it.</p>

<p>“You shut up,” he observed to Clifford, “it’s fate, and that settles
it.”</p>

<p>“It’s Rowden, and that settles it,” murmured Clifford, concealing a
grin. For after all he was not Hastings’ wet nurse. So it came about
that the train which left the Gare St. Lazare at 9.15 a.m. stopped a
moment in its career towards Havre and deposited at the red-roofed
station of La Roche a merry party, armed with sunshades, trout-rods, and
one cane, carried by the non-combatant, Hastings. Then, when they had
established their camp in a grove of sycamores which bordered the little
river Ept, Clifford, the acknowledged master of all that pertained to
sportsmanship, took command.</p>

<p>“You, Rowden,” he said, “divide your flies with Elliott and keep an eye
on him or else he’ll be trying to put on a float and sinker. Prevent him
by force from grubbing about for worms.”</p>

<p>Elliott protested, but was forced to smile in the general laugh.</p>

<p>“You make me ill,” he asserted; “do you think this is my first trout?”</p>

<p>“I shall be delighted to see your first trout,” said Clifford, and
dodging a fly hook, hurled with intent to hit, proceeded to sort and
equip three slender rods destined to bring joy and fish to Cécile,
Colette, and Jacqueline. With perfect gravity he ornamented each line
with four split shot, a small hook, and a brilliant quill float.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> shall never touch the worms,” announced Cécile with a shudder.</p>

<p>Jacqueline and Colette hastened to sustain her, and Hastings pleasantly
offered to act in the capacity of general baiter and taker-off of fish.
But Cécile, doubtless fascinated by the gaudy flies in Clifford’s book,
decided to accept lessons from him in the true art, and presently
disappeared up the Ept with Clifford in tow.</p>

<p>Elliott looked doubtfully at Colette.</p>

<p>“I prefer gudgeons,” said that damsel with decision, “and you and
Monsieur Rowden may go away when you please; may they not, Jacqueline?”</p>

<p>“Certainly,” responded Jacqueline.</p>

<p>Elliott, undecided, examined his rod and reel.</p>

<p>“You’ve got your reel on wrong side up,” observed Rowden.</p>

<p>Elliott wavered, and stole a glance at Colette.</p>

<p>“I—I—have almost decided to—er—not to flip the flies about just
now,” he began. “There’s the pole that Cécile left—”</p>

<p>“Don’t call it a pole,” corrected Rowden.</p>

<p>“<i>Rod</i>, then,” continued Elliott, and started off in the wake of the two
girls, but was promptly collared by Rowden.</p>

<p>“No, you don’t! Fancy a man fishing with a float and sinker when he has
a fly rod in his hand! You come along!”</p>

<p>Where the placid little Ept flows down between its thickets to the
Seine, a grassy bank shadows the haunt of the gudgeon, and on this bank
sat Colette and Jacqueline and chattered and laughed and watched the
swerving of the scarlet quills, while Hastings, his hat over his eyes,
his head on a bank of moss, listened to their soft voices and gallantly
unhooked the small and indignant gudgeon when a flash of a rod and a
half-suppressed scream announced a catch. The sunlight filtered through
the leafy thickets awaking to song the forest birds. Magpies in spotless
black and white flirted past, alighting near by with a hop and bound and
twitch of the tail. Blue and white jays with rosy breasts shrieked
through the trees, and a low-sailing hawk wheeled among the fields of
ripening wheat, putting to flight flocks of twittering hedge birds.</p>

<p>Across the Seine a gull dropped on the water like a plume. The air was
pure and still. Scarcely a leaf moved. Sounds from a distant farm came
faintly, the shrill cock-crow and dull baying. Now and then a steam-tug
with big raking smoke-pipe, bearing the name “Guêpe 27,” ploughed up the
river dragging its interminable train of barges, or a sailboat dropped
down with the current toward sleepy Rouen.</p>

<p>A faint fresh odour of earth and water hung in the air, and through the
sunlight, orange-tipped butterflies danced above the marsh grass, soft
velvety butterflies flapped through the mossy woods.</p>

<p>Hastings was thinking of Valentine. It was two o’clock when Elliott
strolled back, and frankly admitting that he had eluded Rowden, sat down
beside Colette and prepared to doze with satisfaction.</p>

<p>“Where are your trout?” said Colette severely.</p>

<p>“They still live,” murmured Elliott, and went fast asleep.</p>

<p>Rowden returned shortly after, and casting a scornful glance at the
slumbering one, displayed three crimson-flecked trout.</p>

<p>“And that,” smiled Hastings lazily, “that is the holy end to which the
faithful plod,—the slaughter of these small fish with a bit of silk and
feather.”</p>

<p>Rowden disdained to answer him. Colette caught another gudgeon and awoke
Elliott, who protested and gazed about for the lunch baskets, as
Clifford and Cécile came up demanding instant refreshment. Cécile’s
skirts were soaked, and her gloves torn, but she was happy, and
Clifford, dragging out a two-pound trout, stood still to receive the
applause of the company.</p>

<p>“Where the deuce did you get that?” demanded Elliott.</p>

<p>Cécile, wet and enthusiastic, recounted the battle, and then Clifford
eulogized her powers with the fly, and, in proof, produced from his
creel a defunct chub, which, he observed, just missed being a trout.</p>

<p>They were all very happy at luncheon, and Hastings was voted “charming.”
He enjoyed it immensely,—only it seemed to him at moments that
flirtation went further in France than in Millbrook, Connecticut, and he
thought that Cécile might be a little less enthusiastic about Clifford,
that perhaps it would be quite as well if Jacqueline sat further away
from Rowden, and that possibly Colette could have, for a moment at
least, taken her eyes from Elliott’s face. Still he enjoyed it—except
when his thoughts drifted to Valentine, and then he felt that he was
very far away from her. La Roche is at least an hour and a half from
Paris. It is also true that he felt a happiness, a quick heart-beat
when, at eight o’clock that night the train which bore them from La
Roche rolled into the Gare St. Lazare and he was once more in the city
of Valentine.</p>

<p>“Good-night,” they said, pressing around him. “You must come with us
next time!”</p>

<p>He promised, and watched them, two by two, drift into the darkening
city, and stood so long that, when again he raised his eyes, the vast
Boulevard was twinkling with gas-jets through which the electric lights
stared like moons.</p>

</body></html>
