<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><title>The Art of War | Project Gutenberg</title>

<link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.9 by Project Gutenberg"/>
</head>
<body class="x-ebookmaker x-ebookmaker-3"><div class="chapter" id="pgepubid00009">
<h2><a id="chap06"/>Appreciations of Sun Tzŭ</h2>
<p>
Sun Tzŭ has exercised a potent fascination over the minds of some of China’s
greatest men. Among the famous generals who are known to have studied his pages
with enthusiasm may be mentioned Han Hsin (<i>d</i>. 196 B.C.), [49] Feng I (<i>d</i>. 34
A.D.), [50] Lu Meng (<i>d</i>. 219), [51] and Yo Fei (1103-1141). [52] The opinion of
Ts’ao Kung, who disputes with Han Hsin the highest place in Chinese
military annals, has already been recorded. [53] Still more remarkable, in one
way, is the testimony of purely literary men, such as Su Hsun (the father of Su
Tung-p’o), who wrote several essays on military topics, all of which owe
their chief inspiration to Sun Tzŭ. The following short passage by him is
preserved in the <i>Yu Hai:</i> [54]—
</p>
<p class="p1">
Sun Wu’s saying, that in war one cannot make certain of conquering, [55] is
very different indeed from what other books tell us. [56] Wu Ch’i was a
man of the same stamp as Sun Wu: they both wrote books on war, and they are
linked together in popular speech as "Sun and Wu." But Wu Ch’i’s remarks
on war are less weighty, his rules are rougher and more crudely stated, and
there is not the same unity of plan as in Sun Tzŭ’s work, where the style is
terse, but the meaning fully brought out.
</p>
<p>
The following is an extract from the "Impartial Judgments in the Garden of
Literature" by Cheng Hou:—
</p>
<p class="p1">
Sun Tzŭ’s 13 chapters are not only the staple and base of all military men’s
training, but also compel the most careful attention of scholars and men of
letters. His sayings are terse yet elegant, simple yet profound, perspicuous
and eminently practical. Such works as the <i>Lun Yu</i>, the <i>I Ching</i>
and the great Commentary, [57] as well as the writings of Mencius, Hsun
K’uang and Yang Chu, all fall below the level of Sun Tzŭ.
</p>
<p>
Chu Hsi, commenting on this, fully admits the first part of the criticism,
although he dislikes the audacious comparison with the venerated classical
works. Language of this sort, he says, "encourages a ruler’s bent towards
unrelenting warfare and reckless militarism."
</p>
</div></body></html>
