<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Meditations, by Marcus Aurelius</title>

<link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.9 by Project Gutenberg"/>
</head>
<body class="x-ebookmaker x-ebookmaker-3"><div class="chapter" id="pgepubid00020">
<h2><a id="link2H_GLOS"/>
      GLOSSARY
    </h2>
<p>
      This Glossary includes all proper names (excepting a few which are
      insignificant or unknown) and all obsolete or obscure words. ADRIANUS, or
      Hadrian (76-138 A. D.), 14th Roman Emperor.
    </p>
<p>
      Agrippa, M. Vipsanius (63-12 B.C.), a distinguished soldier under
      Augustus.
    </p>
<p>
      Alexander the Great, King of Macedonia, and Conqueror of the East, 356-323
      B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Antisthenes of Athens, founder of the sect of Cynic philosophers, and an
      opponent of Plato, 5th century B.C Antoninus Pius, 15th Roman Emperor,
      138-161 AD. one of the best princes that ever mounted a throne.
    </p>
<p>
      Apathia: the Stoic ideal was calmness in all circumstance an insensibility
      to pain, and absence of all exaltation at, pleasure or good fortune.
    </p>
<p>
      Apelles, a famous painter of antiquity.
    </p>
<p>
      Apollonius of Alexandria, called Dyscolus, or the 'ill-tempered,' a great
      grammarian.
    </p>
<p>
      Aposteme, tumour, excrescence.
    </p>
<p>
      Archimedes of Syracuse 287-212 B.C., the most famous mathematician of
      antiquity.
    </p>
<p>
      Athos, a mountain promontory at the N. of the Aegean Sea.
    </p>
<p>
      Augustus, first Roman Emperor (ruled 31 B.C.-14 AD.).
    </p>
<p>
      Avoid, void.
    </p>
<p>
      BACCHIUS: there Were several persons of this name, and the one meant is
      perhaps the musician.
    </p>
<p>
      Brutus (1) the liberator of the Roman people from their kings, and (2) the
      murderer of Cæsar.
    </p>
<p>
      Both names were household words.
    </p>
<p>
      Cæsar, Caius, Julius, the Dictator and Conqueror.
    </p>
<p>
      Caieta, a town in Latium.
    </p>
<p>
      Camillus, a famous dictator in the early days of the Roman Republic.
    </p>
<p>
      Carnuntum, a town on the Danube in Upper Pannonia.
    </p>
<p>
      Cato, called of Utica, a Stoic who died by his own hand after the battle
      of Thapsus, 46 B.C. His name was proverbial for virtue and courage.
    </p>
<p>
      Cautelous, cautious.
    </p>
<p>
      Cecrops, first legendary King of Athens.
    </p>
<p>
      Charax, perhaps the priestly historian of that name, whose date is
      unknown, except that it must be later than Nero.
    </p>
<p>
      Chirurgeon, surgeon.
    </p>
<p>
      Chrysippus, 280-207 B.C., a Stoic philosopher, and the founder of Stoicism
      as a systematic philosophy.
    </p>
<p>
      Circus, the Circus Maximus at Rome, where games were held. There were four
      companies who contracted to provide horses, drivers, etc. These were
      called Factiones, and each had its distinguishing colour: russata (red),
      albata (white), veneta (blue), prasina (green). There was high rivalry
      between them, and riots and bloodshed not infrequently.
    </p>
<p>
      Cithaeron, a mountain range N. of Attica.
    </p>
<p>
      Comedy, ancient; a term applied to the Attic comedy of Aristophanes and
      his time, which criticised persons and politics, like a modern comic
      journal, such as Punck. See New Comedy.
    </p>
<p>
      Compendious, short.
    </p>
<p>
      Conceit, opinion.
    </p>
<p>
      Contentation, contentment.
    </p>
<p>
      Crates, a Cynic philosopher of the 4th century B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Crœsus, King of Lydia, proverbial for wealth; he reigned 560-546 B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Cynics, a school of philosophers, founded by Antisthenes. Their texts were
      a kind of caricature of Socraticism. Nothing was good but virtue, nothing
      bad but vice. The Cynics repudiated all civil and social claims, and
      attempted to return to what they called a state of nature. Many of them
      were very disgusting in their manners.
    </p>
<p>
      DEMETRIUS of Phalerum, an Athenian orator, statesman, philosopher, and
      poet. Born 345 B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Democritus of Abdera (460-361 B.C.), celebrated as the 'laughing
      philosopher,' whose constant thought was 'What fools these mortals be.' He
      invented the Atomic Theory.
    </p>
<p>
      Dio of Syracuse, a disciple of Plato, and afterwards tyrant of Syracuse.
      Murdered 353 B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Diogenes, the Cynic, born about 412 B.C., renowned for his rudeness and
      hardihood.
    </p>
<p>
      Diognetus, a painter.
    </p>
<p>
      Dispense with, put up with.
    </p>
<p>
      Dogmata, pithy sayings, or philosophical rules of life.
    </p>
<p>
      EMPEDOCLES of Agrigentum, fl. 5th century B.C., a philosopher, who first
      laid down that there were "four elements." He believed in the
      transmigration of souls, and the indestructibility of matter.
    </p>
<p>
      Epictetus, a famous Stoic philosopher. He was of Phrygia, at first a
      slave, then freedman, lame, poor, and contented. The work called
      Encheiridion was compiled by a pupil from his discourses.
    </p>
<p>
      Epicureans, a sect of philosophers founded by Epicurus, who "combined the
      physics of Democritus," i.e. the atomic theory, "with the ethics of
      Aristippus."
    </p>
<p>
      They proposed to live for happiness, but the word did not bear that coarse
      and vulgar sense originally which it soon took.
    </p>
<p>
      Epicurus of Samos, 342-270 B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Lived at Athens in his "gardens," an urbane and kindly, if somewhat
      useless, life. His character was simple and temperate, and had none of the
      vice or indulgence which was afterwards associated with the name of
      Epicurean.
    </p>
<p>
      Eudoxus of Cnidus, a famous astronomer and physician of the 4th century B.
      C.
    </p>
<p>
      FATAL, fated.
    </p>
<p>
      Fortuit, chance (adj.).
    </p>
<p>
      Fronto, M. Cornelius, a rhetorician and pleader, made consul in 143 A.D. A
      number of his letters to M, Aur. and others are extant.
    </p>
<p>
      GRANUA, a tributary of the Danube.
    </p>
<p>
      HELICE, ancient capital city of Achaia, swallowed up by an earthquake, 373
      B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Helvidius Priscus, son-in-law of Thrasea Paetus, a noble man and a lover
      of liberty. He was banished by Nero, and put to death by Vespasian.
    </p>
<p>
      Heraclitus of Ephesus, who lived in the 6th century B.C. He wrote on
      philosophy and natural science.
    </p>
<p>
      Herculaneum, near Mount Vesuvius, buried by the eruption of 79 AD.
    </p>
<p>
      Hercules, p. 167, should be Apollo. See Muses.
    </p>
<p>
      Hiatus, gap.
    </p>
<p>
      Hipparchus of Bithynia, an astronomer of the 2nd century B.C., "The true
      father of astronomy."
    </p>
<p>
      Hippocrates of Cos, about 460-357 B.C. One of the most famous physicians
      of antiquity.
    </p>
<p>
      IDIOT, means merely the non-proficient in anything, the "layman," he who
      was not technically trained in any art, craft, or calling.
    </p>
<p>
      LEONNATUS, a distinguished general under Alexander the Great.
    </p>
<p>
      Lucilla, daughter of M. Aurelius, and wife of Verus, whom she survived.
    </p>
<p>
      MÆCENAS, a trusted adviser of Augustus, and a munificent patron of wits
      and literary men.
    </p>
<p>
      Maximus, Claudius, a Stoic philosopher.
    </p>
<p>
      Menippus, a Cynic philosopher.
    </p>
<p>
      Meteores, ta metewrologika, "high philosophy," used specially of astronomy
      and natural philosophy, which were bound up with other speculations.
    </p>
<p>
      Middle Comedy, something midway between the Old and New Comedy. See
      Comedy, Ancient, and New Comedy.
    </p>
<p>
      Middle things, Book 7, XXV. The Stoics divided all things into virtue,
      vice, and indifferent things; but as "indifferent" they regarded most of
      those things which the world regards as good or bad, such as wealth or
      poverty. Of these, some were "to be desired," some "to be rejected."
    </p>
<p>
      Muses, the nine deities who presided over various kinds of poesy, music,
      etc. Their leader was Apollo, one of whose titles is Musegetes, the Leader
      of the Muses.
    </p>
<p>
      NERVES, strings.
    </p>
<p>
      New Comedy, the Attic Comedy of Menander and his school, which criticised
      not persons but manners, like a modern comic opera. See Comedy, Ancient.
    </p>
<p>
      PALESTRA, wrestling school.
    </p>
<p>
      Pancratiast, competitor in the pancratium, a combined contest which
      comprised boxing and wrestling.
    </p>
<p>
      Parmularii, gladiators armed with a small round shield (parma).
    </p>
<p>
      Pheidias, the most famous sculptor of antiquity.
    </p>
<p>
      Philippus, founder of the Macedonian supremacy, and father of Alexander
      the Great.
    </p>
<p>
      Phocion, an Athenian general and statesman, a noble and high-minded man,
      4th century B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      He was called by Demosthenes, "the pruner of my periods."
    </p>
<p>
      He was put to death by the State in 317, on a false suspicion, and left a
      message for his son "to bear no grudge against the Athenians."
    </p>
<p>
      Pine, torment.
    </p>
<p>
      Plato of Athens, 429-347 B.C. He used the dialectic method invented by his
      master Socrates.
    </p>
<p>
      He was, perhaps, as much poet as philosopher. He is generally identified
      with the Theory of Ideas, that things are what they are by participation
      with our eternal Idea. His "Commonwealth" was a kind of Utopia.
    </p>
<p>
      Platonics, followers of Plato.
    </p>
<p>
      Pompeii, near Mount Vesuvius, buried in the eruption of 79 A. D.
    </p>
<p>
      Pompeius, C. Pompeius Magnus, a very successful general at the end of the
      Roman Republic (106-48 B.C.).
    </p>
<p>
      Prestidigitator, juggler.
    </p>
<p>
      Pythagoras of Samos, a philosopher, scientist, and moralist of the 6th
      century B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      QUADI, a tribe of S. Germany.
    </p>
<p>
      M. Aurelius carried on war against them, and part of this book was written
      in the field.
    </p>
<p>
      RICTUS, gape, jaws.
    </p>
<p>
      Rusticus, Q. Junius, or Stoic philosopher, twice made consul by M.
      Aurelius.
    </p>
<p>
      SACRARY, shrine.
    </p>
<p>
      Salaminius, Book 7, XXXVII. Leon of Sala-mis. Socrates was ordered by the
      Thirty Tyrants to fetch him before them, and Socrates, at his own peril,
      refused.
    </p>
<p>
      Sarmatae, a tribe dwelling in Poland.
    </p>
<p>
      Sceletum, skeleton.
    </p>
<p>
      Sceptics, a school of philosophy founded by Pyrrho (4th century B.C.). He
      advocated "suspension of judgment," and taught the relativity of knowledge
      and impossibility of proof. The school is not unlike the Agnostic school.
    </p>
<p>
      Scipio, the name of two great soldiers, P. Corn. Scipio Africanus,
      conqueror of Hannibal, and P.
    </p>
<p>
      Corn. Sc. Afr. Minor, who came into the family by adoption, who destroyed
      Carthage.
    </p>
<p>
      Secutoriani (a word coined by C.), the Sececutores, light-armed
      gladiators, who were pitted against others with net and trident.
    </p>
<p>
      Sextus of Chaeronea, a Stoic philosopher, nephew of Plutarch.
    </p>
<p>
      Silly, simple, common.
    </p>
<p>
      Sinuessa, a town in Latium.
    </p>
<p>
      Socrates, an Athenian philosopher (469-399 B.C.), founder of the dialectic
      method. Put to death on a trumped-up charge by his countrymen.
    </p>
<p>
      Stint, limit (without implying niggardliness).
    </p>
<p>
      Stoics, a philosophic system founded by Zeno (4th century B.C.), and
      systematised by Chrysippus (3rd century B.C.). Their physical theory was a
      pantheistic materialism, their summum bonum "to live according to nature."
      Their wise man needs nothing, he is sufficient to himself; virtue is good,
      vice bad, external things indifferent.
    </p>
<p>
      THEOPHRASTUS, a philosopher, pupil of Aristotle, and his successor as
      president of the Lyceum. He wrote a large number of works on philosophy
      and natural history. Died 287 B.C.
    </p>
<p>
      Thrasea, P. Thrasea Pactus, a senator and Stoic philosopher, a noble and
      courageous man. He was condemned to death by Nero.
    </p>
<p>
      Tiberius, 2nd Roman Emperor (14-31 AD.). He spent the latter part of his
      life at Capreae (Capri), off Naples, in luxury or debauchery, neglecting
      his imperial duties.
    </p>
<p>
      To-torn, torn to pieces.
    </p>
<p>
      Trajan, 13th Roman Emperor, 52-117 A.D.
    </p>
<p>
      VERUS, Lucius Aurelius, colleague of M. Aurelius in the Empire.
    </p>
<p>
      He married Lucilla, daughter of M. A., and died 169 A.D.
    </p>
<p>
      Vespasian, 9th Roman Emperor XENOCRATES of Chalcedon, 396-314 B.C., a
      philosopher, and president of the Academy.
    </p>
<hr/>
<h3 id="pgepubid00021">Paragraphs with First Lines</h3>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0001" class="pginternal"> <b>HIS FIRST BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0002" class="pginternal"> I. Of my grandfather Verus I have learned to
        be gentle and meek, and to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0003" class="pginternal"> II. Of him that brought me up, not to be
        fondly addicted to either of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0004" class="pginternal"> III. Of Diognetus, not to busy myself about
        vain things, and not easily </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0005" class="pginternal"> IV. To Rusticus I am beholding, that I first
        entered into the conceit </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0006" class="pginternal"> V. From Apollonius, true liberty, and
        unvariable steadfastness, and not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0007" class="pginternal"> VI. Of Sextus, mildness and the pattern of a
        family governed with </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0008" class="pginternal"> VII. From Alexander the Grammarian, to be
        un-reprovable myself, and not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0009" class="pginternal"> VIII. Of Fronto, to how much envy and fraud
        and hypocrisy the state of a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0010" class="pginternal"> IX. Of Alexander the Platonic, not often nor
        without great necessity to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0011" class="pginternal"> X. Of Catulus, not to contemn any friend's
        expostulation, though unjust, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0012" class="pginternal"> XI. From my brother Severus, to be kind and
        loving to all them of my </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0013" class="pginternal"> XII. From Claudius Maximus, in all things to
        endeavour to have power </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0014" class="pginternal"> XIII. In my father, I observed his meekness;
        his constancy without </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0015" class="pginternal"> XIV. From the gods I received that I had good
        grandfathers, and parents, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0016" class="pginternal"> XV. In the country of the Quadi at Granua,
        these. Betimes in the morning </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0017" class="pginternal"> XVI. Whatsoever I am, is either flesh, or
        life, or that which we </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-2.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0018" class="pginternal"> XVII. Whatsoever proceeds from the gods
        immediately, that any man will </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0019" class="pginternal"> <b>THE SECOND BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0020" class="pginternal"> I. Remember how long thou hast already put off
        these things, and how </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0021" class="pginternal"> II. Let it be thy earnest and incessant care
        as a Roman and a man to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0022" class="pginternal"> III. Do, soul, do; abuse and contemn thyself;
        yet a while and the time </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0023" class="pginternal"> IV. Why should any of these things that happen
        externally, so much </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0024" class="pginternal"> V. For not observing the state of another
        man's soul, scarce was ever </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0025" class="pginternal"> VI. These things thou must always have in
        mind: What is the nature </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0026" class="pginternal"> VII. Theophrastus, where he compares sin with
        sin (as after a vulgar </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0027" class="pginternal"> VIII. Whatsoever thou dost affect, whatsoever
        thou dost project, so do, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0028" class="pginternal"> IX. Consider how quickly all things are
        dissolved and resolved: the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0029" class="pginternal"> X. It is the part of a man endowed with a good
        understanding faculty, to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0030" class="pginternal"> XI. Consider with thyself how man, and by what
        part of his, is joined </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0031" class="pginternal"> XII. If thou shouldst live three thousand, or
        as many as ten thousands </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0032" class="pginternal"> XIII. Remember that all is but opinion and
        conceit, for those things </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0033" class="pginternal"> XIV. A man's soul doth wrong and disrespect
        itself first and especially, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-3.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0034" class="pginternal"> XV. The time of a man's life is as a point;
        the substance of it ever </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0035" class="pginternal"> <b>THE THIRD BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0036" class="pginternal"> I. A man must not only consider how daily his
        life wasteth and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0037" class="pginternal"> II. This also thou must observe, that
        whatsoever it is that naturally </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0038" class="pginternal"> III. Hippocrates having cured many sicknesses,
        fell sick himself and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0039" class="pginternal"> IV. Spend not the remnant of thy days in
        thoughts and fancies concerning </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0040" class="pginternal"> V. Do nothing against thy will, nor contrary
        to the community, nor </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0041" class="pginternal"> VI. To be cheerful, and to stand in no need,
        either of other men's help </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0042" class="pginternal"> VII. If thou shalt find anything in this
        mortal life better than </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0043" class="pginternal"> VIII. Never esteem of anything as profitable,
        which shall ever constrain </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0044" class="pginternal"> IX. In the mind that is once truly disciplined
        and purged, thou canst </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0045" class="pginternal"> X. Use thine opinative faculty with all honour
        and respect, for in </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0046" class="pginternal"> XI. To these ever-present helps and mementoes,
        let one more be added, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0047" class="pginternal"> XII. What is this, that now my fancy is set
        upon? of what things doth </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0048" class="pginternal"> XIII. If thou shalt intend that which is
        present, following the rule of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0049" class="pginternal"> XIV. As physicians and chirurgeons have always
        their instruments ready </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0050" class="pginternal"> XV. Be not deceived; for thou shalt never live
        to read thy moral </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0051" class="pginternal"> XVI. To steal, to sow, to buy, to be at rest,
        to see what is to be done </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-4.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0052" class="pginternal"> XVII. To be capable of fancies and
        imaginations, is common to man and </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0053" class="pginternal"> <b>THE FOURTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0054" class="pginternal"> I. That inward mistress part of man if it be
        in its own true natural </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0055" class="pginternal"> II. Let nothing be done rashly, and at random,
        but all things according </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0056" class="pginternal"> III. They seek for themselves private retiring
        </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0057" class="pginternal"> IV. If to understand and to be reasonable be
        common unto all men, then </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0058" class="pginternal"> V. As generation is, so also death, a secret
        of nature's wisdom: a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0059" class="pginternal"> VI. Such and such things, from such and such
        causes, must of necessity </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0060" class="pginternal"> VII. Let opinion be taken away, and no man
        will think himself wronged. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0061" class="pginternal"> VIII. Whatsoever doth happen in the world,
        doth happen justly, and so if </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0062" class="pginternal"> IX. Conceit no such things, as he that
        wrongeth thee conceiveth, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0063" class="pginternal"> X. These two rules, thou must have always in a
        readiness. First, do </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0064" class="pginternal"> XI. Hast thou reason? I have. Why then makest
        thou not use of it? For if </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0065" class="pginternal"> XII. As a part hitherto thou hast had a
        particular subsistence: and now </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0066" class="pginternal"> XIII. Within ten days, if so happen, thou
        shalt be esteemed a god of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0067" class="pginternal"> XIV. Not as though thou hadst thousands of
        years to live. Death hangs </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0068" class="pginternal"> XV. Now much time and leisure doth he gain,
        who is not curious to know </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0069" class="pginternal"> XVI. He who is greedy of credit and reputation
        after his death, doth </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0070" class="pginternal"> XVII. If so be that the souls remain after
        death (say they that will not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0071" class="pginternal"> XVIII. Not to wander out of the way, but upon
        every motion and desire, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0072" class="pginternal"> XIX. Whatsoever is expedient unto thee, O
        World, is expedient unto me; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0073" class="pginternal"> XX. They will say commonly, Meddle not with
        many things, if thou wilt </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0074" class="pginternal"> XXI. Try also how a good man's life; (of one,
        who is well pleased with </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0075" class="pginternal"> XXII. Either this world is a kosmoz or comely
        piece, because all </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0076" class="pginternal"> XXIII. A black or malign disposition, an
        effeminate disposition; an </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0077" class="pginternal"> XXIV. He is a true fugitive, that flies from
        reason, by which men are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0078" class="pginternal"> XXV. There is, who without so much as a coat;
        and there is, who without </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0079" class="pginternal"> XXVI. What art and profession soever thou hast
        learned, endeavour to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0080" class="pginternal"> XXVII. Consider in my mind, for example's
        sake, the times of Vespasian: </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0081" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. Those words which once were common and
        ordinary, are now become </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0082" class="pginternal"> XXIX. Whatsoever is now present, and from day
        to day hath its existence; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0083" class="pginternal"> XXX. Thou art now ready to die, and yet hast
        thou not attained to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0084" class="pginternal"> XXXI. Behold and observe, what is the state of
        their rational part; and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0085" class="pginternal"> XXXII. In another man's mind and understanding
        thy evil Cannot subsist, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0086" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. Ever consider and think upon the world
        as being but one living </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0087" class="pginternal"> XXXIV. What art thou, that better and divine
        part excepted, but as </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0088" class="pginternal"> XXXV. To suffer change can be no hurt; as no
        benefit it is, by change to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0089" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. Whatsoever doth happen in the world,
        is, in the course of nature, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0090" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. Let that of Heraclitus never be out of
        thy mind, that the death </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0091" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. Even as if any of the gods should
        tell thee, Thou shalt </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0092" class="pginternal"> XXXIX. Let it be thy perpetual meditation, how
        many physicians who </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0093" class="pginternal"> XL. Thou must be like a promontory of the sea,
        against which though </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0094" class="pginternal"> XLI. Oh, wretched I, to whom this mischance is
        happened! nay, happy I, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0095" class="pginternal"> XLII. It is but an ordinary coarse one, yet it
        is a good effectual </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-5.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0096" class="pginternal"> XLIII. Let thy course ever be the most
        compendious way. The most </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0097" class="pginternal"> <b>THE FIFTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0098" class="pginternal"> I. In the morning when thou findest thyself
        unwilling to rise, consider </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0099" class="pginternal"> II. How easy a thing is it for a man to put
        off from him all turbulent </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0100" class="pginternal"> III. Think thyself fit and worthy to speak, or
        to do anything that is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0101" class="pginternal"> IV. I continue my course by actions according
        to nature, until I </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0102" class="pginternal"> V. No man can admire thee for thy sharp acute
        language, such is thy </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0103" class="pginternal"> VI. Such there be, who when they have done a
        good turn to any, are ready </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0104" class="pginternal"> VII. The form of the Athenians' prayer did run
        thus: 'O rain, rain, good </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0105" class="pginternal"> VIII. As we say commonly, The physician hath
        prescribed unto this man, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0106" class="pginternal"> IX. Be not discontented, be not disheartened,
        be not out of hope, if </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0107" class="pginternal"> X. Thou must comfort thyself in the
        expectation of thy natural </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0108" class="pginternal"> XI. What is the use that now at this present I
        make of my soul? Thus </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0109" class="pginternal"> XII. What those things are in themselves,
        which by the greatest part are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0110" class="pginternal"> XIII. All that I consist of, is either form or
        matter. No corruption can </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0111" class="pginternal"> XIV. Reason, and rational power, are faculties
        which content themselves </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0112" class="pginternal"> XV. Such as thy thoughts and ordinary
        cogitations are, such will thy </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0113" class="pginternal"> XVI. To desire things impossible is the part
        of a mad man. But it is a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0114" class="pginternal"> XVII. After one consideration, man is nearest
        unto us; as we are bound </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0115" class="pginternal"> XVIII. Honour that which is chiefest and most
        powerful in the world, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0116" class="pginternal"> XIX. That which doth not hurt the city itself;
        cannot hurt any citizen. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0117" class="pginternal"> XX. Let not that chief commanding part of thy
        soul be ever subject to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0118" class="pginternal"> XXI. To live with the Gods. He liveth with the
        Gods, who at all times </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0119" class="pginternal"> XXII. Be not angry neither with him whose
        breath, neither with him whose </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0120" class="pginternal"> XXIII. 'Where there shall neither roarer be,
        nor harlot.' Why so? As </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0121" class="pginternal"> XXIV. That rational essence by which the
        universe is governed, is for </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0122" class="pginternal"> XXV. How hast thou carried thyself hitherto
        towards the Gods? towards </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0123" class="pginternal"> XXVI. Why should imprudent unlearned souls
        trouble that which is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0124" class="pginternal"> XXVII. Within a very little while, thou wilt
        be either ashes, or a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0125" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. Thou mayest always speed, if thou wilt
        but make choice of the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0126" class="pginternal"> XXIX. If this neither be my wicked act, nor an
        act anyways depending </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-6.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0127" class="pginternal"> XXX. Let death surprise rue when it will, and
        where it will, I may be a </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0128" class="pginternal"> <b>THE SIXTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0129" class="pginternal"> I. The matter itself, of which the universe
        doth consist, is of itself </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0130" class="pginternal"> II. Be it all one unto thee, whether half
        frozen or well warm; whether </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0131" class="pginternal"> III. Look in, let not either the proper
        quality, or the true worth of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0132" class="pginternal"> IV. All substances come soon to their change,
        and either they shall </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0133" class="pginternal"> V. The best kind of revenge is, not to become
        like unto them. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0134" class="pginternal"> VI. Let this be thy only joy, and thy only
        comfort, from one sociable </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0135" class="pginternal"> VII. The rational commanding part, as it alone
        can stir up and turn </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0136" class="pginternal"> VIII. According to the nature of the universe
        all things particular are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0137" class="pginternal"> IX. Whensoever by some present hard
        occurrences thou art constrained to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0138" class="pginternal"> X. If it were that thou hadst at one time both
        a stepmother, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0139" class="pginternal"> XI. How marvellous useful it is for a man to
        represent unto himself </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0140" class="pginternal"> XII. See what Crates pronounceth concerning
        Xenocrates himself. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0141" class="pginternal"> XIII. Those things which the common sort of
        people do admire, are most </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0142" class="pginternal"> XIV. Some things hasten to be, and others to
        be no more. And even </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0143" class="pginternal"> XV. Not vegetative spiration, it is not surely
        (which plants have) that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0144" class="pginternal"> XVI. Under, above, and about, are the motions
        of the elements; but </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0145" class="pginternal"> XVII. Who can choose but wonder at them? They
        will not speak well of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0146" class="pginternal"> XVIII. Do not ever conceive anything
        impossible to man, which by thee </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0147" class="pginternal"> XIX. Suppose that at the palestra somebody
        hath all to-torn thee with </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0148" class="pginternal"> XX. If anybody shall reprove me, and shall
        make it apparent unto me, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0149" class="pginternal"> XXI. I for my part will do what belongs unto
        me; as for other things, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0150" class="pginternal"> XXII. Alexander of Macedon, and he that
        dressed his mules, when once </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0151" class="pginternal"> XXIII Consider how many different things,
        whether they concern our </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0152" class="pginternal"> XXIV. if any should put this question unto
        thee, how this word Antoninus </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0153" class="pginternal"> XXV. Is it not a cruel thing to forbid men to
        affect those things, which </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0154" class="pginternal"> XXVI. Death is a cessation from the impression
        of the senses, the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0155" class="pginternal"> XXVII. If in this kind of life thy body be
        able to hold out, it is a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0156" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. Do all things as becometh the disciple
        of Antoninus Pius. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0157" class="pginternal"> XXIX. Stir up thy mind, and recall thy wits
        again from thy natural </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0158" class="pginternal"> XXX. I consist of body and soul. Unto my body
        all things are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0159" class="pginternal"> XXXI. As long as the foot doth that which
        belongeth unto it to do, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0160" class="pginternal"> XXXII. Dost thou not see, how even those that
        profess mechanic arts, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0161" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. Asia, Europe; what are they, but as
        corners of the whole world; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0162" class="pginternal"> XXXIV He that seeth the things that are now,
        hath Seen all that either </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0163" class="pginternal"> XXXV. Fit and accommodate thyself to that
        estate and to those </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0164" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. What things soever are not within the
        proper power and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0165" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. We all work to one effect, some
        willingly, and with a rational </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0166" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. Doth either the sun take upon him to
        do that which belongs to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0167" class="pginternal"> XXXIX. If so be that the Gods have deliberated
        in particular of those </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0168" class="pginternal"> XL. Whatsoever in any kind doth happen to any
        one, is expedient to the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0169" class="pginternal"> XLI. As the ordinary shows of the theatre and
        of other such places, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0170" class="pginternal"> XLII. Let the several deaths of men of all
        sorts, and of all sorts of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0171" class="pginternal"> XLIII. When thou wilt comfort and cheer
        thyself, call to mind the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0172" class="pginternal"> XLIV. Dost thou grieve that thou dost weigh
        but so many pounds, and not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0173" class="pginternal"> XLV. Let us do our best endeavours to persuade
        them; but however, if </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0174" class="pginternal"> XLVI. The ambitious supposeth another man's
        act, praise and applause, to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0175" class="pginternal"> XLVII. It is in thy power absolutely to
        exclude all manner of conceit </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0176" class="pginternal"> XLVIII. Use thyself when any man speaks unto
        thee, so to hearken unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0177" class="pginternal"> XLIX. That which is not good for the bee-hive,
        cannot be good for the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0178" class="pginternal"> L. Will either passengers, or patients, find
        fault and complain, either </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0179" class="pginternal"> LI. How many of them who came into the world
        at the same time when I </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0180" class="pginternal"> LII. To them that are sick of the jaundice,
        honey seems bitter; and to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0181" class="pginternal"> LIII. No man can hinder thee to live as thy
        nature doth require. Nothing </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-7.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0182" class="pginternal"> LIV. What manner of men they be whom they seek
        to please, and what to </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0183" class="pginternal"> <b>THE SEVENTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0184" class="pginternal"> I. What is wickedness? It is that which many
        time and often thou hast </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0185" class="pginternal"> II. What fear is there that thy dogmata, or
        philosophical resolutions </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0186" class="pginternal"> III. That which most men would think
        themselves most happy for, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0187" class="pginternal"> IV. Word after word, every one by itself, must
        the things that are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0188" class="pginternal"> V. Is my reason, and understanding sufficient
        for this, or no? If it be </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0189" class="pginternal"> VI. Let not things future trouble thee. For if
        necessity so require that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0190" class="pginternal"> VII. Whatsoever is material, doth soon vanish
        away into the common </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0191" class="pginternal"> VIII. To a reasonable creature, the same
        action is both according </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0192" class="pginternal"> IX. Straight of itself, not made straight.
        </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0193" class="pginternal"> X. As several members in one body united, so
        are reasonable creatures </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0194" class="pginternal"> XI. Of things that are external, happen what
        will to that which can </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0195" class="pginternal"> XII. Whatsoever any man either doth or saith,
        thou must be good; not for </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0196" class="pginternal"> XIII. This may ever be my comfort and
        security: my understanding, that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0197" class="pginternal"> XIV. What is rv&amp;nfLovia, or happiness: but
        a7~o~ &amp;d~wv, or, a good </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0198" class="pginternal"> XV. Is any man so foolish as to fear change,
        to which all things that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0199" class="pginternal"> XVI. Through the substance of the universe, as
        through a torrent pass </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0200" class="pginternal"> XVII. The nature of the universe, of the
        common substance of all things </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0201" class="pginternal"> XVIII. An angry countenance is much against
        nature, and it is oftentimes </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0202" class="pginternal"> XIX. Whensoever any man doth trespass against
        other, presently consider </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0203" class="pginternal"> XX. Fancy not to thyself things future, as
        though they were present </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0204" class="pginternal"> XXI. Wipe off all opinion stay the force and
        violence of unreasonable </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0205" class="pginternal"> XXII. All things (saith he) are by certain
        order and appointment. And </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0206" class="pginternal"> XXIII. Out of Plato. 'He then whose mind is
        endowed with true </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0207" class="pginternal"> XXIV. Out of Antisthenes. 'It is a princely
        thing to do well, and to be </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0208" class="pginternal"> XXV. Out of several poets and comics. 'It will
        but little avail thee, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0209" class="pginternal"> XXVI. Out of Plato. 'My answer, full of
        justice and equity, should be </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0210" class="pginternal"> XXVII. To look back upon things of former
        ages, as upon the manifold </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0211" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. He hath a stronger body, and is a
        better wrestler than I. What </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0212" class="pginternal"> XXIX. Where the matter may be effected
        agreeably to that reason, which </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0213" class="pginternal"> XXX. Look not about upon other men's minds and
        understandings; but look </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0214" class="pginternal"> XXXI. As one who had lived, and were now to
        die by right, whatsoever is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0215" class="pginternal"> XXXII. Thou must use thyself also to keep thy
        body fixed and steady; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0216" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. The art of true living in this world
        is more like a wrestler's, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0217" class="pginternal"> XXXIV. Thou must continually ponder and
        consider with thyself, what </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0218" class="pginternal"> XXXV. What pain soever thou art in, let this
        presently come to thy mind, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0219" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. Take heed lest at any time thou stand
        so affected, though towards </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0220" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. How know we whether Socrates were so
        eminent indeed, and of so </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0221" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. For it is a thing very possible, that
        a man should be a very </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0222" class="pginternal"> XXXIX. Free from all compulsion in all
        cheerfulness and alacrity thou </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0223" class="pginternal"> XL. Then hath a man attained to the estate of
        perfection in his life and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0224" class="pginternal"> XLI. Can the Gods, who are immortal, for the
        continuance of so many ages </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0225" class="pginternal"> XLII. What object soever, our reasonable and
        sociable faculty doth meet </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0226" class="pginternal"> XLIII. When thou hast done well, and another
        is benefited by thy action, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-8.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0227" class="pginternal"> XLIV. The nature of the universe did once
        certainly before it was </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0228" class="pginternal"> <b>THE EIGHTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0229" class="pginternal"> I. This also, among other things, may serve to
        keep thee from vainglory; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0230" class="pginternal"> II. Upon every action that thou art about, put
        this question to thyself; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0231" class="pginternal"> III. Alexander, Caius, Pompeius; what are
        these to Diogenes, Heraclitus, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0232" class="pginternal"> IV. What they have done, they will still do,
        although thou shouldst hang </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0233" class="pginternal"> V. That which the nature of the universe doth
        busy herself about, is; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0234" class="pginternal"> VI. Every particular nature hath content, when
        in its own proper course </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0235" class="pginternal"> VII. Thou hast no time nor opportunity to
        read. What then? Hast thou </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0236" class="pginternal"> VIII. Forbear henceforth to complain of the
        trouble of a courtly life, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0237" class="pginternal"> IX. Repentance is an inward and
        self-reprehension for the neglect or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0238" class="pginternal"> X. This, what is it in itself, and by itself,
        according to its proper </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0239" class="pginternal"> XI. When thou art hard to be stirred up and
        awaked out of thy sleep, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0240" class="pginternal"> XII. As every fancy and imagination presents
        itself unto thee, consider </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0241" class="pginternal"> XIII. At thy first encounter with any one, say
        presently to thyself: </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0242" class="pginternal"> XIV. Remember, that to change thy mind upon
        occasion, and to follow him </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0243" class="pginternal"> XV. If it were thine act and in thine own
        power, wouldest thou do </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0244" class="pginternal"> XVI. Whatsoever dieth and falleth, however and
        wheresoever it die </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0245" class="pginternal"> XVII. Whatsoever is, was made for something:
        as a horse, a vine. Why </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0246" class="pginternal"> XVIII. Nature hath its end as well in the end
        and final consummation of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0247" class="pginternal"> XIX. As one that tosseth up a ball. And what
        is a ball the better, if </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0248" class="pginternal"> XX. That which must be the subject of thy
        consideration, is either the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0249" class="pginternal"> XXI. Most justly have these things happened
        unto thee: why dost not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0250" class="pginternal"> XXII. Shall I do it? I will; so the end of my
        action be to do good unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0251" class="pginternal"> XXIII. By one action judge of the rest: this
        bathing which usually takes </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0252" class="pginternal"> XXIV. Lucilla buried Verus; then was Lucilla
        herself buried by others. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0253" class="pginternal"> XXV. The true joy of a man, is to do that
        which properly belongs unto a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0254" class="pginternal"> XXVI. If pain be an evil, either it is in
        regard of the body; (and that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0255" class="pginternal"> XXVII. Wipe off all idle fancies, and say unto
        thyself incessantly; Now </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0256" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. Whether thou speak in the Senate or
        whether thou speak to any </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0257" class="pginternal"> XXIX. Augustus his court; his wife, his
        daughter, his nephews, his </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0258" class="pginternal"> XXX. Contract thy whole life to the measure
        and proportion of one single </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0259" class="pginternal"> XXXI. Receive temporal blessings without
        ostentation, when they are sent </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0260" class="pginternal"> XXXII. If ever thou sawest either a hand, or a
        foot, or a head lying by </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0261" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. As almost all her other faculties and
        properties the nature of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0262" class="pginternal"> XXXIV. Let not the general representation unto
        thyself of the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0263" class="pginternal"> XXXV. What? are either Panthea or Pergamus
        abiding to this day by their </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0264" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. If thou beest quick-sighted, be so in
        matter of judgment, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0265" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. In the whole constitution of man, I
        see not any virtue contrary </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0266" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. If thou canst but withdraw conceit
        and opinion concerning that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0267" class="pginternal"> XXXIX. That which is a hindrance of the
        senses, is an evil to the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0268" class="pginternal"> XL. If once round and solid, there is no fear
        that ever it will change. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0269" class="pginternal"> XLI. Why should I grieve myself; who never did
        willingly grieve any </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0270" class="pginternal"> XLII. This time that is now present, bestow
        thou upon thyself. They that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0271" class="pginternal"> XLIII. Take me and throw me where thou wilt: I
        am indifferent. For there </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0272" class="pginternal"> XLIV. Is this then a thing of that worth, that
        for it my soul should </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0273" class="pginternal"> XLV. Nothing can happen unto thee, which is
        not incidental unto thee, as </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0274" class="pginternal"> XLVI. Remember that thy mind is of that nature
        as that it becometh </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0275" class="pginternal"> XLVII. Keep thyself to the first bare and
        naked apprehensions of things, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0276" class="pginternal"> XLVIII. Is the cucumber bitter? set it away.
        Brambles are in the way? </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0277" class="pginternal"> XLIX. Not to be slack and negligent; or loose,
        and wanton in thy </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0278" class="pginternal"> L. 'They kill me, they cut my flesh; they
        persecute my person with </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0279" class="pginternal"> LI. He that knoweth not what the world is,
        knoweth not where he himself </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0280" class="pginternal"> LII. Not only now henceforth to have a common
        breath, or to hold </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0281" class="pginternal"> LIII. Wickedness in general doth not hurt the
        world. Particular </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0282" class="pginternal"> LIV. The sun seemeth to be shed abroad. And
        indeed it is diffused but </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0283" class="pginternal"> LV. He that feareth death, either feareth that
        he shall have no sense at </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0284" class="pginternal"> LVI. All men are made one for another: either
        then teach them better, or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0285" class="pginternal"> LVII. The motion of the mind is not as the
        motion of a dart. For </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-9.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0286" class="pginternal"> LVIII. To pierce and penetrate into the estate
        of every one's </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0287" class="pginternal"> <b>THE NINTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0288" class="pginternal"> I. He that is unjust, is also impious. For the
        nature of the universe, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0289" class="pginternal"> II. It were indeed more happy and comfortable,
        for a man to depart out </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0290" class="pginternal"> III. Thou must not in matter of death carry
        thyself scornfully, but as </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0291" class="pginternal"> IV. He that sinneth, sinneth unto himself. He
        that is unjust, hurts </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0292" class="pginternal"> V. If my present apprehension of the object be
        right, and my present </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0293" class="pginternal"> VI. To wipe away fancy, to use deliberation,
        to quench concupiscence, to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0294" class="pginternal"> VII. Of all unreasonable creatures, there is
        but one unreasonable soul; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0295" class="pginternal"> VIII. Man, God, the world, every one in their
        kind, bear some fruits. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0296" class="pginternal"> IX. Either teach them better if it be in thy
        power; or if it be not, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0297" class="pginternal"> X. Labour not as one to whom it is appointed
        to be wretched, nor as one </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0298" class="pginternal"> XI. This day I did come out of all my trouble.
        Nay I have cast out all </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0299" class="pginternal"> XII. All those things, for matter of
        experience are usual and ordinary; </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0300" class="pginternal"> XIII. The things themselves that affect us,
        they stand without doors, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0301" class="pginternal"> XIV. As virtue and wickedness consist not in
        passion, but in action; so </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0302" class="pginternal"> XV. To the stone that is cast up, when it
        comes down it is no hurt unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0303" class="pginternal"> XVI. Sift their minds and understandings, and
        behold what men they be, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0304" class="pginternal"> XVII. All things that are in the world, are
        always in the estate </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0305" class="pginternal"> XVIII. it is not thine, but another man's sin.
        Why should it trouble </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0306" class="pginternal"> XIX. Of an operation and of a purpose there is
        an ending, or of an </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0307" class="pginternal"> XX. As occasion shall require, either to thine
        own understanding, or to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0308" class="pginternal"> XXI. As thou thyself, whoever thou art, were
        made for the perfection and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0309" class="pginternal"> XXII. Children's anger, mere babels; wretched
        souls bearing up dead </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0310" class="pginternal"> XXIII. Go to the quality of the cause from
        which the effect doth </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0311" class="pginternal"> XXIV. Infinite are the troubles and miseries,
        that thou hast already </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0312" class="pginternal"> XXV. When any shall either impeach thee with
        false accusations, or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0313" class="pginternal"> XXVI. Up and down, from one age to another, go
        the ordinary things of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0314" class="pginternal"> XXVII. Within a while the earth shall cover us
        all, and then she herself </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0315" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. And these your professed politicians,
        the only true practical </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0316" class="pginternal"> XXIX. From some high place as it were to look
        down, and to behold </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0317" class="pginternal"> XXX. Many of those things that trouble and
        straiten thee, it is in thy </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0318" class="pginternal"> XXXI. To comprehend the whole world together
        in thy mind, and the whole </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0319" class="pginternal"> XXXII. What are their minds and
        understandings; and what the things that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0320" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. Loss and corruption, is in very deed
        nothing else but change and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0321" class="pginternal"> XXXIV. How base and putrid, every common
        matter is! Water, dust, and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0322" class="pginternal"> XXXV. Will this querulousness, this murmuring,
        this complaining and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0323" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. It is all one to see these things for a
        hundred of years together </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0324" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. If he have sinned, his is the harm,
        not mine. But perchance he </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0325" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. Either all things by the providence
        of reason happen unto every </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0326" class="pginternal"> XXXIX. Sayest thou unto that rational part,
        Thou art dead; corruption </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0327" class="pginternal"> XL. Either the Gods can do nothing for us at
        all, or they can still and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0328" class="pginternal"> XLI. 'In my sickness' (saith Epicurus of
        himself:) 'my discourses were </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0329" class="pginternal"> XLII. It is common to all trades and
        professions to mind and intend that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-10.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0330" class="pginternal"> XLIII. When at any time thou art offended with
        any one's impudency, put </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0331" class="pginternal"> <b>THE TENTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0332" class="pginternal"> I. O my soul, the time I trust will be, when
        thou shalt be good, simple, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0333" class="pginternal"> II. As one who is altogether governed by
        nature, let it be thy care to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0334" class="pginternal"> III. Whatsoever doth happen unto thee, thou
        art naturally by thy natural </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0335" class="pginternal"> IV. Him that offends, to teach with love and
        meek ness, and to show him </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0336" class="pginternal"> V. Whatsoever it be that happens unto thee, it
        is that which from all </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0337" class="pginternal"> VI. Either with Epicurus, we must fondly
        imagine the atoms to be the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0338" class="pginternal"> VII. All parts of the world, (all things I
        mean that are contained </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0339" class="pginternal"> VIII. Now that thou hast taken these names
        upon thee of good, modest, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0340" class="pginternal"> IX. Toys and fooleries at home, wars abroad:
        sometimes terror, sometimes </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0341" class="pginternal"> X. As the spider, when it hath caught the fly
        that it hunted after, is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0342" class="pginternal"> XI. To find out, and set to thyself some
        certain way and method of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0343" class="pginternal"> XII. He hath got loose from the bonds of his
        body, and perceiving that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0344" class="pginternal"> XIII. What use is there of suspicion at all?
        or, why should thoughts </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0345" class="pginternal"> XIV. What is that that is slow, and yet quick?
        merry, and yet grave? He </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0346" class="pginternal"> XV. In the morning as soon as thou art awaked,
        when thy judgment, before </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0347" class="pginternal"> XVI. Give what thou wilt, and take away what
        thou wilt, saith he that is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0348" class="pginternal"> XVII. So live as indifferent to the world and
        all worldly objects, as </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0349" class="pginternal"> XVIII. Make it not any longer a matter of
        dispute or discourse, what are </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0350" class="pginternal"> XIX. Ever to represent unto thyself; and to
        set before thee, both the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0351" class="pginternal"> XX. Consider them through all actions and
        occupations, of their lives: </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0352" class="pginternal"> XXI. That is best for every one, that the
        common nature of all doth send </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0353" class="pginternal"> XXII. The earth, saith the poet, doth often
        long after the rain. So is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0354" class="pginternal"> XXIII. Either thou dost Continue in this kind
        of life and that is it, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0355" class="pginternal"> XXIV Let it always appear and be manifest unto
        thee that solitariness, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0356" class="pginternal"> XXV. He that runs away from his master is a
        fugitive. But the law is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0357" class="pginternal"> XXVI. From man is the seed, that once cast
        into the womb man hath no </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0358" class="pginternal"> XXVII. Ever to mind and consider with thyself;
        how all things that now </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0359" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. As a pig that cries and flings when
        his throat is cut, fancy to </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0360" class="pginternal"> XXIX. Whatsoever it is that thou goest about,
        consider of it by thyself, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0361" class="pginternal"> XXX. When thou art offended with any man's
        transgression, presently </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0362" class="pginternal"> XXXI. When thou seest Satyro, think of
        Socraticus and Eutyches, or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0363" class="pginternal"> XXXII. What a subject, and what a course of
        life is it, that thou doest </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0364" class="pginternal"> XXXIII. Let it not be in any man's power, to
        say truly of thee, that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0365" class="pginternal"> XXXIV. As he that is bitten by a mad dog, is
        afraid of everything almost </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0366" class="pginternal"> XXXV. A good eye must be good to see
        whatsoever is to be seen, and not </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0367" class="pginternal"> XXXVI. There is not any man that is so happy
        in his death, but that some </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0368" class="pginternal"> XXXVII. Use thyself; as often, as thou seest
        any man do anything, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-11.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0369" class="pginternal"> XXXVIII. Remember, that that which sets a man
        at work, and hath power </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0370" class="pginternal"> <b>THE ELEVENTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0371" class="pginternal"> I. The natural properties, and privileges of a
        reasonable soul are: That </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0372" class="pginternal"> II. A pleasant song or dance; the
        Pancratiast's exercise, sports that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0373" class="pginternal"> III. That soul which is ever ready, even now
        presently (if need be) from </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0374" class="pginternal"> IV. Have I done anything charitably? then am I
        benefited by it. See </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0375" class="pginternal"> V. Tragedies were at first brought in and
        instituted, to put men in mind </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0376" class="pginternal"> VI. How clearly doth it appear unto thee, that
        no other course of thy </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0377" class="pginternal"> VII. A branch cut off from the continuity of
        that which was next unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0378" class="pginternal"> VIII. To grow together like fellow branches in
        matter of good </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0379" class="pginternal"> IX. It is not possible that any nature should
        be inferior unto art, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0380" class="pginternal"> X. The things themselves (which either to get
        or to avoid thou art put </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0381" class="pginternal"> XI. Then is the soul as Empedocles doth liken
        it, like unto a sphere or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0382" class="pginternal"> XII. Will any contemn me? let him look to
        that, upon what grounds he </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0383" class="pginternal"> XIII. They contemn one another, and yet they
        seek to please one another: </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0384" class="pginternal"> XIV. How rotten and insincere is he, that
        saith, I am resolved to carry </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0385" class="pginternal"> XV. To live happily is an inward power of the
        soul, when she is affected </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0386" class="pginternal"> XVI. Of everything thou must consider from
        whence it came, of what </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0387" class="pginternal"> XVII. Four several dispositions or
        inclinations there be of the mind and </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0388" class="pginternal"> XVIII. What portion soever, either of air or
        fire there be in thee, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0389" class="pginternal"> XIX. He that hath not one and the self-same
        general end always as long </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0390" class="pginternal"> XX. Remember the fable of the country mouse
        and the city mouse, and the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0391" class="pginternal"> XXI. Socrates was wont to call the common
        conceits and opinions of men, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0392" class="pginternal"> XXII. The Lacedæmonians at their public
        spectacles were wont to appoint </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0393" class="pginternal"> XXIII. What Socrates answered unto Perdiccas,
        why he did not come unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0394" class="pginternal"> XXIV. In the ancient mystical letters of the
        Ephesians, there was an </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0395" class="pginternal"> XXV. The Pythagoreans were wont betimes in the
        morning the first thing </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0396" class="pginternal"> XXVI. How Socrates looked, when he was fain to
        gird himself with a </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0397" class="pginternal"> XXVII. In matter of writing or reading thou
        must needs be taught before </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0398" class="pginternal"> XXVIII. 'My heart smiled within me.' 'They
        will accuse even virtue </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0399" class="pginternal"> XXIX. As they that long after figs in winter
        when they cannot be had; so </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0400" class="pginternal"> XXX. 'As often as a father kisseth his child,
        he should say secretly </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-12.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0401" class="pginternal"> XXXI. 'Of the free will there is no thief or
        robber:' out of Epictetus; </a>
</p>
<p>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0402" class="pginternal"> <b>THE TWELFTH BOOK</b> </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0403" class="pginternal"> I. Whatsoever thou doest hereafter aspire
        unto, thou mayest even now </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0404" class="pginternal"> II. God beholds our minds and understandings,
        bare and naked from these </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0405" class="pginternal"> III. I have often wondered how it should come
        to pass, that every man </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0406" class="pginternal"> IV. how come it to pass that the Gods having
        ordered all other things </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0407" class="pginternal"> V. Use thyself even unto those things that
        thou doest at first despair </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0408" class="pginternal"> VI. Let these be the objects of thy ordinary
        meditation: to consider, </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0409" class="pginternal"> VII. All worldly things thou must behold and
        consider, dividing them </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0410" class="pginternal"> VIII. How happy is man in this his power that
        hath been granted unto </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0411" class="pginternal"> IX. Whatsoever doth happen in the ordinary
        course and consequence of </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0412" class="pginternal"> X. How ridiculous and strange is he, that
        wonders at anything that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0413" class="pginternal"> XI. Either fate, (and that either an absolute
        necessity, and unavoidable </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0414" class="pginternal"> XII. At the conceit and apprehension that such
        and such a one hath </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0415" class="pginternal"> XIII. If it be not fitting, do it not. If it
        be not true, speak it not. </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0416" class="pginternal"> XIV. Of everything that presents itself unto
        thee, to consider what the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0417" class="pginternal"> XV. It is high time for thee, to understand
        that there is somewhat in </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0418" class="pginternal"> XVI. Remember that all is but opinion, and all
        opinion depends of the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0419" class="pginternal"> XVII. No operation whatsoever it he, ceasing
        for a while, can be truly </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0420" class="pginternal"> XVIII. These three things thou must have
        always in a readiness: first </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0421" class="pginternal"> XIX. Cast away from thee opinion, and thou art
        safe. And what is it that </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0422" class="pginternal"> XX. Let thy thoughts ever run upon them, who
        once for some one thing or </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0423" class="pginternal"> XXI. To them that ask thee, Where hast thou
        seen the Gods, or how </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0424" class="pginternal"> XXII. Herein doth consist happiness of life,
        for a man to know </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0425" class="pginternal"> XXIII. There is but one light of the sun,
        though it be intercepted by </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0426" class="pginternal"> XXIV. What doest thou desire? To live long.
        What? To enjoy the </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0427" class="pginternal"> XXV. What a small portion of vast and infinite
        eternity it is, that is </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0428" class="pginternal"> XXVI. What is the present estate of my
        understanding? For herein lieth </a>
</p>
<p>
<a href="5709277951690388395_2680-h-13.htm.xhtml#link2H_4_0429" class="pginternal"> XXVII. To stir up a man to the contempt of
        death this among other </a>
</p>
</div><div style="display:block;margin-top:4em"/></body></html>
