<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The War of the Worlds, by H. G. Wells</title>
<link href="3182677280859692880_cover.jpg" rel="icon" type="image/x-cover" id="id-4424067618383033825"/>

<link href="0.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="pgepub.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta name="generator" content="Ebookmaker 0.13.9 by Project Gutenberg"/>
</head>
<body class="x-ebookmaker x-ebookmaker-3"><div class="chapter" id="pgepubid00008">
<h2><a id="chap06"/>VI.<br/>
THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.</h2>
<p>
It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay men so swiftly
and so silently. Many think that in some way they are able to generate an
intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute non-conductivity. This
intense heat they project in a parallel beam against any object they choose, by
means of a polished parabolic mirror of unknown composition, much as the
parabolic mirror of a lighthouse projects a beam of light. But no one has
absolutely proved these details. However it is done, it is certain that a beam
of heat is the essence of the matter. Heat, and invisible, instead of visible,
light. Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its touch, lead runs like
water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass, and when it falls upon water,
incontinently that explodes into steam.
</p>
<p>
That night nearly forty people lay under the starlight about the pit, charred
and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the common from Horsell to
Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.
</p>
<p>
The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, and Ottershaw about
the same time. In Woking the shops had closed when the tragedy happened, and a
number of people, shop people and so forth, attracted by the stories they had
heard, were walking over the Horsell Bridge and along the road between the
hedges that runs out at last upon the common. You may imagine the young people
brushed up after the labours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would
make any novelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivial
flirtation. You may figure to yourself the hum of voices along the road in the
gloaming. . . .
</p>
<p>
As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the cylinder had opened,
though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a bicycle to the post office with
a special wire to an evening paper.
</p>
<p>
As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the open, they found little
knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the spinning mirror over the
sand-pits, and the newcomers were, no doubt, soon infected by the excitement of
the occasion.
</p>
<p>
By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may have been a
crowd of three hundred people or more at this place, besides those who had left
the road to approach the Martians nearer. There were three policemen too, one
of whom was mounted, doing their best, under instructions from Stent, to keep
the people back and deter them from approaching the cylinder. There was some
booing from those more thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is
always an occasion for noise and horse-play.
</p>
<p>
Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, had
telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martians emerged, for
the help of a company of soldiers to protect these strange creatures from
violence. After that they returned to lead that ill-fated advance. The
description of their death, as it was seen by the crowd, tallies very closely
with my own impressions: the three puffs of green smoke, the deep humming note,
and the flashes of flame.
</p>
<p>
But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine. Only the fact
that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of the Heat-Ray
saved them. Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror been a few yards higher,
none could have lived to tell the tale. They saw the flashes and the men
falling and an invisible hand, as it were, lit the bushes as it hurried towards
them through the twilight. Then, with a whistling note that rose above the
droning of the pit, the beam swung close over their heads, lighting the tops of
the beech trees that line the road, and splitting the bricks, smashing the
windows, firing the window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a
portion of the gable of the house nearest the corner.
</p>
<p>
In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, the panic-stricken
crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for some moments. Sparks and burning
twigs began to fall into the road, and single leaves like puffs of flame. Hats
and dresses caught fire. Then came a crying from the common. There were shrieks
and shouts, and suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the
confusion with his hands clasped over his head, screaming.
</p>
<p>
“They’re coming!” a woman shrieked, and incontinently
everyone was turning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way
to Woking again. They must have bolted as blindly as a flock of sheep. Where
the road grows narrow and black between the high banks the crowd jammed, and a
desperate struggle occurred. All that crowd did not escape; three persons at
least, two women and a little boy, were crushed and trampled there, and left to
die amid the terror and the darkness.
</p>
</div></body></html>
